ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 1

Transcription ICANN Helsinki
Registry Stakeholder Meeting
Wednesday, 29 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at:

Man:

It is June 29 at 8:00 am. This is the gTLD Registry Stakeholder Group
session in Veranda 1.

Paul Diaz:

Okay everybody let's get this one underway.

Cherie Stubbs:

We can start the recording now please. And do we have anyone on the
teleconference bridge? No? All right thank you.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Cherie. Morning everyone. It's bright and early. Thank you for
joining us. This is Paul Diaz, Chair of the Registry Stakeholder Group, and
this is our face-to-face in Helsinki. Today's the 29th of June. We put the
agenda up on the screen. We circulated in advance a bunch of updates and
discussions we'll have. Under any other business, anybody want to add
something to the list you don't see there now? Once we get underway, if
there are things that pop into mind by all means just raise your hand and we'll
address them.

Might as well get right into it. The first item you see up there related to the
IANA transition it's a selection of the two customer standing committee reps.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 2

I'm pleased to report that we had four candidates put their names forward
from registries. Ultimately the stakeholder group will select two, and we have
a process underway, a selection process underway. We'll be coming back to
the group once we've worked through that. And the we in this is the ExCom.
We're not doing a vote for the two members. I see you scowling over there,
Jeff.

Look folks, one of the challenges this group has, and let me insert it's not on
the list, but, you know, the vote for our budget right now, good lord people
this is embarrassing. We only have 26 votes. We have a membership of over
90 right now, or high 80s for voting members. You know, we've got a problem
as a group that there's very few who are regularly taking the various things
responsibly and an awful lot who are just floating along.

And, you know, for something like the budget it's your money and yet we
can't get, after several weeks, anywhere near the simple majority minimum.
So, you know, please a impassioned request to go back to the
SurveyMonkey, it's a simple yes or no. And for something more complex like
the selection of CSC candidates, we have a selection process, a tool that we
built that the ExCom will walk folks through once we've made the decisions
but this is one that we feel because we're on such a tight deadline, we're
going to hold it to ourselves. Jeff?

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks. Jeff Neuman. I understand you're not, or we should all not be happy,
with turnout for the budget, but I don't think that that's a reason to basically
say that all decisions, or important decisions, should just be made by ExCom.
I think if you don't get a quorum for a vote for the two representatives, I think
the backup can be selection by the ExCom based on the people that did vote.

But this is a pretty darn important decision and I mean I trust you guys, the
ExCom, but we didn't elect you for that purpose. So I would not just go the
default of having the ExCom vote on this. I would hold a vote in a short period
of time. If you don't get the quorum, then have the backup be the ExCom

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 3

select based on the votes that were already submitted, or taking that into
consideration. But I don't agree with - I'd like to hear from everybody else, but
I don't agree that it should just be a decision by the ExCom on this.

Paul Diaz:

Yes. Reg?

Reg Levy:

Would you suggest that we take the majority of the actual - the people who
did vote, whether or not it's a quorum?

Jeff Neuman:

Sorry, I think I would like to hear from everybody else personally. I would say
that if it's strong majority then yes. If it's pretty close, then I think there's some
judgment that would need to be made.

Paul Diaz:

Chuck?

Chuck Gomes:

Thanks. Chuck speaking. You know, our charter doesn't allow that. So we're
creating a problem for ourselves here. We introduced the ExCom in a not too
long ago revision to the charter, but we didn't give the ExCom that kind of
authority. And that was intentional because we wanted the whole
membership involved. But if, like Paul said, if the membership doesn't
participate we're going to have to revisit that.

Paul Diaz:

Donna?

Donna Austin:

Thanks, Paul. So, Jeff, this isn't the first time that we've said this is the way
we were going to do the selection process. We did, you know, we've had a
number of calls where we've discussed it and we've said that the ExCom, you
know, would do the selection process. And I think our intention was that we
would put the candidates to the, you know, tell the membership what our
proposed selection is, and if we don't get any objection then we'd move
forward.

Paul Diaz:

Jeff?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 4

Jeff Neuman:

Yes with all due respect, and I apologize for not catching it earlier, so, but
there's always things that people don't catch. So that's my fault and I
apologize for that. But then to select someone and then ask for objections.
Look, most of us are pretty kind spirited and none of us want to go public and
just say, "Oh you selected so and so, or you selected Jeff Neuman." There's maybe there a couple of people that would say, "I hate him." But for the most
part, people are kind spirited and they're not going to want to go public and
say, "No that person's terrible." So I don't agree with that approach of having
to file objections on someone.

Paul Diaz:

Kristina?

Kristina Rosette: Kristina Rosette, Amazon Registry. I think maybe one potential solution, if
folks are willing to consider it, that might be a good middle ground would be
to have the ExCom make recommendations based on its evaluation of the
candidates but then still have the membership vote. And that to me I think
would allow kind of the best of each scenario. Whereas the ExCom has had
the time to really study the candidates, apply the criteria, and then
simultaneously the membership would have the opportunity to vote. And I
think it would just have to be made very clear to everyone you - there is no
opportunity to extend this vote. It has to happen.

Paul Diaz:

We'll come back to that. Thanks, Kristina. Jon?

Jon Nevett:

I guess we have a short-term problem and a long-term problem. The shortterm problem is what to do about this selection and, you know, I think maybe
part of the selection process is the ExCom takes input. You announce who
the four applicants are and you give the opportunity for those of us in the
stakeholder group to provide input to you. Maybe there's a form or something
that we could fill out, so those of us who are interested or have concerns
about an applicant or really think, you know, one applicant is great and you

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 5

want to promote that person, then we have that opportunity and you can take
that into account along with your own evaluations. One idea.

Two, I'm not opposed to Kristina's idea of, you know, you guys propose a
slate and set up a down vote on the slate. Again, that's a short-term issue.
The long-term issue is I think we've got to lower the quorum requirement. We
had a debate when we went through this last time, and Chuck won. So because of the size of the group, some of us proposed a lower quorum
requirement of 25% instead of 50% for a vote.

And, you know, yes we could try to energize people but in general there are
people who are just going to be apathetic about it and are willing to draft
behind those of us who are spending more time on it, understand it better.
And that might not be a bad thing. And there's sometimes where, you know,
as long as we get a critical mass we should be able to move forward. So I
would suggest one of these short-terms solutions and that as a long-term
solution. Thank you.

Paul Diaz:

Thanks, Jon. Reg?

Reg Levy:

So, Jon, I think that's a great idea that we revise the quorum but I'm
wondering if instead of it just being a baseline membership percentage if we
want to start tracking who's attending meetings regularly, including online,
whether they're taking part in the e-mail discussions, that kind of thing,
because it often ends up being the people who, quote, unquote, care. But
there are a number of people who are here in this room and aren't
necessarily speaking up, and I think that they should count towards that.

Paul Diaz:

Jordyn Buchanan?

Jordyn Buchanan: So I was going to start adding my own ideas about how to fix the long-term
voting problem but that's probably going to mess up the agenda for today. So
can I suggest that we - that you convene a little task force to figure out what

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 6

to do about the quorum problems and we move that discussion into the future
as opposed to trying to fix that today as well. I'll happily participate.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Jordyn. Yes it looks like we're going to have an Evolution 4
working group in our future. Very good point that Jon makes about the
threshold. That was something that was actively debated when we last
updated our charter. At the time, you know, there's a lot of logic about
keeping it at 50 and that's what stayed in the charter. But the arguments,
given what we're seeing for the lower threshold, need to be revisited. So we
will do that.

As far as the short term, the question of the vote, probably - excuse me for
not being clearer, the ExCom had every intention of coming back to the group
for some validation. We weren't just going to simply select. Please
understand though the very tight timeline. We must identify, the Registry
Stakeholder Group, who the candidates are no later than 15 July, actually the
14.

Jeff, the body language you're thinking like no problem. Okay we've got a
major holiday coming in the U.S. We have one stakeholder group biweekly
meeting the 13th. So there's good coincidence there. But the selection
process that the ExCom set up we, because of scheduling and whatnot,
could not ourselves get to it until 8th and 9th of July. So recommending
putting forward, "Hey we feel these are the strongest two of the four" and
some rationale, we need a little time do that.

Long and short, if we want to do any kind of vote or at least a - as long as
there's no opposition to the names put forward, it's going to be very tight. It's
going to be like a 48-hour ballot. So just folks understand. That's not - we're
not trying to railroad in any way, it's just a function of the calendar and what
we can with the time we have. Jeff?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 7

Jeff Neuman:

Could you tell us the deadline and put it out there? Thinking now it's going to
be hard is not a reason not to do it. So I may have missed it. I haven't seen
the four names but they may be out there. Is it out on our list who are the four
- no? So put it out there now. I mean we - it's the 29th. Put the names out
there along with any supporting materials that they submitted and supported
that candidacy. Give - you said the ExCom's meeting - well give some times,
set up a schedule for a vote and let's do it.

Paul Diaz:

Okay. And I hear you. Let's do it people, because we do. We've
communicated a lot. For the four who came forward, please understand, they
never understood that their names were going to be publicized broadly, that
we'd be voting. I don't think they'll have any problem with it but we didn't set it
up this way. And so we moved this along on the agenda.

The next item is very, very similar and is about to get underway so we can
learn from the CSC and apply it to a selection of RZERC, the root zone
candidates that we need, make it a more clear, transparent, easily
understood process. But, you know, we're kind of starting to make things up
on the fly now, and this is all too often the norm for us. Chuck?

Chuck Gomes:

Thanks. Chuck speaking again. And a couple things. First of all, isn't there a
template of qualifications that the executive committee was going to use? Is
that feasible to send that out to the group and anybody that wants could
provide to the executive committee their input on that little template on the list
of candidates? I'm not pushing for that but that would be one way to do it. I
don't know if that's feasible or not because I haven't seen the template.

The second thing, don't we need to have some - we need to have - there's
two seats but we need to have some alternatives too because the ccNSO
and the GNSO have to meet and try to deal with diversity, assuming equal
comparable qualifications and so forth. So we're really selecting more than
two. We may have two primary but two backups. Is that correct?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 8

Paul Diaz:

That is correct, Chuck, and again we're going to lay that out. We have Donna and I have been meeting with the ccNSO to make sure that we are in
coordination. Again, the timelines are such that each of the first groups picks
two, has alternates, that's correct, and there is a ratification process. In the
case of the two names that we put forward that the GNSO Council, first
through a selection subcommittee and then an affirmation vote by the full
council, all that happens no later than mid-August. There is a timeline. I don't
recall all the specific milestones on it, but there are all those steps still to
come.

The selection tool template that we had that we refer to, yes we can share so
that folks understand how we will be evaluating and coming up with our
recommendations. And folks have thoughts on the, you know, inputs would
be welcome. Jonathan?

Jonathan Robinson: Thanks, Paul. I just want to clarify. It sounds like we're heading towards
publishing the names with the qualifications and taking a vote. Are we going
down Kristina's route or something along those lines where the ExCom's
going to in some way order that slate and make preferences? Is that where
we're heading? Thanks.

Paul Diaz:

Donna?

Donna Austin:

Personally I think we have to because it's not just one criteria, there's a
number of different criteria that the candidates responded to. And I think if we
open it up to the group to do their own kind of, you know, evaluation, we're
going to end up in a really difficult situation potentially. So I think the ExCom
does the evaluation. We can take input from others that can, you know, help
us with the discussion but I think really let's try to keep the evaluation to a
small group and take input from the broader group would be my preference.

Paul Diaz:

Jeff?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 9

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks. Jeff Neuman. I'd be happy to be on that committee that looks at the
criteria. I helped in the whole transition process on coming up with certain
SLEs and other things that have to be looked at. And I know you guys are
getting frustrated, but I think this is a bigger discussion we need to have later
on as to the role of the ExCom. I don't think when any of us elected the
ExCom officers we had this vision of leadership in mind in terms of the role of
the ExCom. I think it's a bigger discussion.

So I know you all are frustrated but this is not the reason - we did not go into
the election of the ExCom with this thought in mind that it was going to be
some group that hierarchical can make certain decisions that we didn't
envision. This right here is the key tenant to the whole IANA transition and to
the accountability that many of us have spent a lot of time on, years' worth of
work to just say this is a decision for the ExCom. This is critical, these two
items.

Paul Diaz:

Thanks, Jeff, and I hear you. In all fairness, we the ExCom, Donna and I have
been talking about CSC for a good six weeks. So this is not news to the
group. And I absolutely hear you. I do not believe the ExCom should be the
star chamber, making decisions without the input, active input. The simple
reality is the stakeholder group has consistently not shown the level of
activism. So what you're asking for is theoretical, not practical.

Jeff Neuman:

I'm sorry. The voter turnout in the U.S. for example is 20% or even lower on
certain elections. That's not a reason not to have an election. I'm sorry, that's
not a good enough reason in my view. And I could be - if people disagree,
please.

Paul Diaz:

Okay, we shouldn't spend too much time but to Jon Nevett's point, our charter
right now to make it a valid vote it's a 50% quorum. That's 42 votes where we
currently stand in terms of voting members in good standing. If we have a
vote, we've got to meet that level. If you don't, it's a failed vote and you've got
to go back to square one. And we never have enough time to go back to

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 10

square one. So these are longer term challenges that we do have to address.
Like I said, it looks like we have an Evolution 4 working group in our future
and let's hash it out there.

Donna, you first.

Donna Austin:

Yes, I think my frustration, Jeff, is that we've had this, you know, as Paul said,
it's actually not been six weeks that we've had this agenda, it's a number of
times that we've had the discussion and here we are, you know, at the last
minute you're saying, you know, I don't like where you are. I mean I think you
were on most of these calls. So, you know, that's my frustration. You know,
it's not the first time we've raised it, and we're trying to get something done
here. So, you know, apologies at being frustrated but it is pretty annoying.

Paul Diaz:

Jonathan?

Jonathan Robinson: It seems to me like there's a pragmatic solution. I mean Jeff's got some
valid sort of fundamental concerns that he's articulated well but that shouldn't
stop us sorting out this issue. And it feels to me like we can navigate through
it by the ExCom putting forward a sequence slate. Put it to the vote. And
here's perhaps what is controversial. If the vote doesn't make the quorum, I
mean we probably have to proceed with the top two anyway. So we say
ideally we'll put it to the vote but out fallback position is that we agree to
proceed with the top two on the slate in any event. So the vote could overrule
the ExCom but it can't nullify the choice.

Paul Diaz:

Pam?

Pam Little:

Yes. Regardless of how we decide on selection, I really would like to know
who those candidates are. I think our default position should always be
transparency first.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 11

Paul Diaz:

Okay we hear you all. Let's move through this. I think Jonathan summed it
up. It's Kristina's idea. That makes the most sense to us. We will get the
template and the candidates' names out. The ExCom is going through the
process. You're all welcome to do it on your own and share any inputs you
have. We will come back with recommendations, who the top two we feel
should be, and we'll set up a call for a vote, which will be, just so everybody's
aware, in that week, week of the 11th. We'll have an opportunity if we need to
on the 13th on our next biweekly call to discuss further.

And I think to Jonathan's point, whether we can reach the threshold or not, in
this case we have to put two names forward. So unless there's violent
opposition to the recommended names, we'll stick to the timeline and get it
down. Maxim?

Maxim Alzoba:

Could we just (unintelligible) name by those two with the words like the
majority of the active participants or something?

Paul Diaz:

Let's just see how it goes when we get there. Chuck?

Chuck Gomes:

Real quick question. You're going to not only tell us the top two but who the
alternates would be as well, right?

Paul Diaz:

Yes.

Chuck Gomes:

Okay thank you.

Paul Diaz:

Indeed. Okay folks. A lot of time, important issues, especially the longer term
view about voting thresholds. We'll address them. The second point up there
I won't go into so much detail but is a similar process coming out of the
transition. We need to identify a Registry Stakeholder Group appointed
member of the RZERC root zone. Sorry for all the acronyms; it's too early in
the morning, but RZERC is very similar. This is an uber geek. This is
somebody who's got very substantial tech background.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 12

So like we - when we had the call for CSC colleagues names to be put
forward, most likely there's nobody in this room right now who would be the
qualified candidate for RZERC, but we certainly have colleagues back in our
home organizations. We will set it up, we will use the same selection tool.
And if people want to be - have this a more active group evaluation
engagement from the start, we can look at that. We have a bit more time
identifying the RZERC candidates so we can set it up that way. Or if we find,
hey, warts and all the way we're moving forward on CSC with an ExCom
evaluation and input and ratification by the membership, if that works, we'll go
with that as well. Jeff?

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks, Paul. Do we have any -- I'm trying to remember now the role of the
RZERC -- but do we have any conflicts rules in terms of candidates that may
also operate a zone or, sorry I'm not speaking well either, do we have any
conflicts rules? Have we established any? So if someone operates a root
zone, having them as a candidate may not be a good idea.

Paul Diaz:

Understood. Let me come back to it. Chuck?

Chuck Gomes:

Sure. First of all it's Root Zone Evolution Review Committee, okay, is what it
stands for. And that's replacing a role that NTIA plays right now if there are
major architectural or technical changes to the root zone and the architecture
that supports that. That's why Paul's right, we need a pretty technical person
for this.

With regard to the conflicts issue, let me be right up front, VeriSign as the root
zone maintainer will have a member on that. So absolutely it shouldn't be
someone from VeriSign, okay, because we have a seat on that as the root
zone maintainer. Okay? So just - I wanted to make clear on that. And it does
have to be somebody technical that understands the, very well, the root zone
architecture and so forth that supports that.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 13

Because what would - what this group will do is provide advice to the - to
ICANN if they - if changes are proposed. Or they could even propose
possible changes to the architecture or something like that. In the past, NTIA
has kind of been the approver of that. That's what this committee is for.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Chuck. Jeff?

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks. And I didn't - Chuck, I wasn't just singling out VeriSign. There are a
couple either -- I believe -- a couple other organizations that may have copies
of a zone or have done other services or things that would also fit under
those conflicts rules. Thanks.

Paul Diaz:

Yes understood. The rules - the tool that we have, we have a working
template right now with the requirements that are there. More specificity
about any conflicts, we will research that before we share it with everybody,
make sure that we don't have any surprises. My sense right now, and I've not
focused on this really specifically, but we have not received an awful lot of
guidance, so maybe this is good that we're - we start discussing consulting at
least amongst ourselves we can establish our own criteria if there's a strong
sense about potential conflicts and whatnot, work that into our evaluation
selection process. We do have some time. We'll come back to everyone on
this one.

All right, with that why don't we keep moving along? We don't have a lot of
time today. The next issue that's up there is about ICANN accountability and
specifically the Work Stream 2 issues and their request for volunteers. Keith
has put into the chat what the key subgroups are. There's quite a few. Keith,
do you want to add anything more?

Keith Drazek:

Sure, Paul. Is Becky in the room?

Becky Burr:

I am on the mic here.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 14

Keith Drazek:

I would defer to you if you have any comments on accountability or Work
Stream 2, but just a note that the CCWG Accountability Group met on
Sunday just prior to this - the official start of the meeting. It was focused
almost entirely on initiating or kicking off the Work Stream 2 effort. So there
are multiple subgroups. As Paul noted, I put into the Adobe chat and I'll
forward to the list a reminder of the list of the Work Stream 2 issues.

Anybody who wants to participate, anyone who has a particular interest in
any of these categories, there is an opportunity for you to volunteer. The
group is currently going through the identification process for the (rapators) or
the leaders of these various sub teams. And, you know, some of these have
potential impacts on us as contracted parties as we look forward.

And I know that there's been some frustration, you know, expressed on
previous calls and on the list about some of the costs associated with Work
Stream 1 already and concerns about the expenses forecast for Work Stream
2. So anybody that has concerns, you know, this is an opportunity for you to
participate in the process. I'll stop there and see if (Becky) has anything else,
or any questions.

Becky Burr:

Yes so just on the cost issue, we are creating a fairly detailed cost
management and budgeting process for Work Stream 2. So I think the chairs
of the GNSO will have received an invitation to participate in some
discussions about that and I'll be reporting back. But there is a considerable
effort focused on sort of reining in the costs, which is largely outside counsel.

I think that for purposes of Work Stream 2 the need for outside counsel is
largely going to actually be related to phase two of the IRP, which is actually
not Work Stream 2 but Work Stream 1 continued, and that is the operating
rules for the independent review process which obviously will need outside
counsel and is fairly important to get it right.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 15

One issue that I would just call to folks' attention, in terms of jurisdiction,
Work Stream 1 did confirm ICANN as a California not-for-profit corporation.
There are - it's in the articles of incorporation. So it would require a fairly
elaborate community support to change that. But there is a jurisdictional work
stream, and it largely relates to the issue of what kind of choice of law
appears in agreements with contracted parties. So for those of you who are
outside of the United States and think ICANN should be providing some
alternatives to California law in terms of contract interpretation, that's where
the discussion will be taking place.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Becky. Thank you, Keith. Again those subgroups have been
noted in the chat. Keith had shared an e-mail. We can resend that to put it at
the top of everybody's list. There's a whole range of issues. So some may be
things that you want to just kind of keep tabs on. Others may be - have pretty
strong views, actively participate.

One thing that we would ask just from the ExCom level or the stakeholder
group level, if you do volunteer, can you please let Cherie or I know just so
we have a sense of who's involved. Sometimes getting the list of members of
the various sub teams is unnecessarily difficult getting it from staff. So if you
just tell us so we're aware, we'll have some sense of do we have gaps, do we
have coverage across the various issues.

All right. Moving - continuing to move through. We've got next on our list the
new TLD Subsequent Procedures Working Group. What we're getting at here
specifically there's a series of questions that that working group has shared
with us seeking input, sort of initial public comments, if you will. We've posted
that to the list. We've actually reached out directly to the folks in our group
that are actively or volunteer to be part of that list. We started drafting
responses to it. We will share that more broadly as soon as we have inputs.

They'd asked for our input no later than the 25th of July. So we have time, but
if you have thoughts, concerns, et cetera, please look because it's pretty

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 16

substantial number - it's five questions but they all have subparts, so there's a
lot of things, perspectives that the working group's looking for. And since
they're fairly early in the process, it's an opportunity for us to help inform and
potentially guide those discussions, those deliberations. So it's important.

Let's do this. Take advantage of the opportunity we have to weigh in early
and, you know, call to anybody, even if you're not actively involved. When
you look at those questions, you probably have certain immediate reactions.
Share your views.

Okay. No other questions about that. And we have our RAA amendment
process. Jon Nevett provided a - did another session here, if folks were
aware. There still remain some questions from the community. It remains to
be seen if they turn into public comments. We have - Freida has graciously
offered to keep tabs on comments that are submitted so that we can be
aware, be prepared if necessary to weigh in.

The thought to date, as far as a stakeholder group comment on the process,
was more high level, more, you know, thanking the participants for the
process that we support and we want them to move forward. Of course we'll
be prepared if we need to to respond to any substantive issues that were
raised by a member of the community, something that we can see on the list.

The way the process right now is envisioned working is that when that
comment period ends in mid-July, I think it's the 13th, a summary report staff will produce a summary report. I think they've given themselves like four
weeks to do that. So none of this is going to happen at Internet speed. But
once it does, the negotiating team will get back together with the ICANN staff.

We'll discuss issues raised. Any of them that are considered substantive,
there'll be a decision made whether they can be incorporated into the
agreement or not. And I guess we'll just have to wait. If it's like a typical
comment period, most of the meatier issues will probably be raised right at

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 17

the end. So we'll just keep tabs on it and keep everybody updated as we
move forward, move towards that date in mid-July. Jon Nevett?

Jon Nevett:

Thanks, Paul. Yes one thing to add. One issue that we learned about in the
webinar and ICANN talked about again yesterday is that they plan on
publishing the amendment to the extent we reach agreement and it gets
approved by both sides in an amendment form. So we would have all our
agreements on our site and then there'll be an amendment amending certain
provisions of those agreements. So the actual agreements that are published
on our site won't be necessarily accurate because you'll have to crossreference to the amendment.

So for example, there's an amendment to 7.5. They'll have the old language
to 7.5 and then have an amendment that we'd all have to look at to see that.
So we have pushed back on that. I think that it might be something that we
want to put in our comments and say for the ease of everyone other than
maybe ICANN staff because it's an administrative burden to do what's called
an amended and restated agreement, we should encourage them to do that.

Because it's just, if you click on the site where it says where your agreement
is and it's not accurate, I think that's a problem. And so I think we should
strongly encourage them to work towards -- it doesn't have to be done
immediately -- but work towards having amended and restated agreements
published on the ICANN site. Thank you.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Jon, a really important point. Agreed. Kristina Rosette.

Kristina Rosette: Kristina Rosette, Amazon Registry. I completely support what Jon just said
and I actually think this might be an opportunity to reach out to some of the
other stakeholder groups and constituencies to identify for them the difficulty
that they are going to have in making reference to those agreements. And I
think the broader the support we can get from the community, the more likely
we'll be successful.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 18

Paul Diaz:

Good thought, Kristina. Reg?

Reg Levy:

Thanks. I know that you're specifically talking about for like each TLD the one
that's posted, but are they also going to do that for the standard one at the
very top where they list, you know, PDF, HTML, redline, et cetera?

Jon Nevett:

Those will be in the correct version I'm sure. Yes. I think that (Krista)
mentioned that yesterday.

Paul Diaz:

Sam?

Samantha Demetriou: Thanks, Paul. I really agree with you on this one, Jon. And I didn't really
accept the rationale when it was like oh it will be a lot of work. I mean we all
do a lot of work every day. So I'm wondering if maybe a letter that we draft,
as the Registry Stakeholder Group, and put that together and, to follow on
Kristina's idea, seek some support, maybe co-signs from other stakeholder
group and constituency chairs is one option.

Paul Diaz:

Jon what are your thoughts?

Jon Nevett:

Yes I think a letter or comments are fine. The only - as soon as Kristina
mentioned it, I said yes that's a great idea. But I don't also want to encourage
necessarily them to like, "Oh once we're filing comments on the registry
agreement" - yes. So maybe we do it after the fact or something like that.

Reg Levy:

Yes I mean, I should have been clear. I was thinking more along the lines of
something that (Samantha) was suggesting, kind of a letter from the
stakeholder group with perhaps signatures from the co-chairs.

Samantha Demetiou: Yes I mean - sorry to interrupt. It's more of like a post-comment
implementation kind of thing. I don't think we should tie it to the comments.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 19

Paul Diaz:

Okay thanks for that clarification. Martin?

Martin Sutton

:

Well

I'm just thinking get a statement that everybody can use in their own
comments so that everybody can submit it.

Paul Diaz:

Nodding heads, so yes maybe that's the way to go too. Anyone else? Okay.
And as always, Jon Nevett, thank you for all the efforts on this long, long
process. All right, then moving on, next issue from Monday and Tuesday's
session, issues, actions, things that come out. While this policy forum, this
meeting B schedule has tried to minimize scheduling conflicts, necessarily
some things happen at the same time, can't be in two places at once. Just
wanted to spend a little time here, offer opportunity, anybody who's been in
sessions, heard things that they just want to make sure that everybody's
aware of, any real surprises or important developments? Kristina, thanks.

Kristina Rosette: Neither -- Kristina Rosette, Amazon Registry -- neither surprise nor a
definitive development. I guess the question is really for Jonathan Robinson.
When I was sitting in the CWG on Auction Proceeds Drafting Team charter
meeting, I think I've characterized that correctly, I kept having flashbacks of
our last Registry Stakeholder Group call and Ken Stubbs' concerns about the
outside fees and costs associated so far with the CCWG accountability.

And to me, the auction proceeds effort I think has the potential to end up
costing a lot in terms of outside counsel fees, costs, et cetera. Is that
something that you all have discussed at all? Has there been any kind of
thought about something that could be put into the charter or something?
Because it would be really unfortunate if those outside costs ended eating up
25% of the available proceeds.

Jonathan Robinson: Thanks, Kristina. It's ringing a bell that we have done something. I can't - I
can come back to the group even on list and let you know if there is
something, but I take your point. I'm - it's actually not something that's

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 20

concerning me particularly, not that I'm not concerned about the cost, but I - it
doesn't feel to me like it's going to be an issue but I take your point. It is, you
know, there's a big chunk of money there and it could very easily be that the
structures could be argued to be set up in such a way that could incur quite
significant costs. So I can see the concern, and it's useful to flag it.

It could be something that could be captured in the charter and try to contain
it. I was more concerned in some ways about this - the conflict of interest
provisions and I was tempted to raise my hand and introduce that because
that's really the, in a sense, the elephant in the room as far as that group's
concerned. But you - and that's not to say your point isn't valid and possibly
of equal concern, but that certainly bothers me as well, just to flag it with the
group.

I mean in essence, in the sort of - from my experience, most if not all working
groups have - allow free participation providing you disclose your interests.
There's quite a strong lobby with respect to the - or set of views with respect
to the auction funds work that the conflict of interest provision should be
substantial. And it's not substantial at the point of allocation of funds, it's
substantial at the point of earlier up in the process. Because essentially the
process, you've got the drafting team, the working group, and the ultimate
mechanism for allocation of funds.

And the push, with some good reason, is to move that conflict of interest
provision much further up the chain. The concern of course is by putting that
in place you exclude potentially many participants. And Jon Nevett made a
very good point in the meeting yesterday about focusing in on the difference
between direct and indirect conflicts. But nevertheless that's - there's quite a
sort of nexus of discussion in and around that.

So if anyone's interested in that or indeed has experience of that, it could be
useful to have input at some point on that. But thanks, Kristina. It's a good

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 21

point and I'll - I've got something specific I'll forward it to you and/or the
group, and it's useful to flag it anyway.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Jonathan and Kristina. Maxim?

Maxim Alzoba:

Just a stupid question. At this stage it looks like hiring permanently a few
good lawyers could cost - be less, even with pensions provided like by the
(unintelligible). Because having another 50 million bucks paid to some offsite
company, were there (unintelligible) or something?

Paul Diaz:

I'm not sure I have the answer, Maxim. Keith?

Keith Drazek:

Thanks, Paul. And I agree with the concern about the expenses, but in this
particular case I mean I sort of expect that ICANN Legal will provide, you
know, guidance and advice or input to this particular process. You know, the
outside counsel for the accountability process was needed - or deemed
necessary because of the potential conflict or challenge, you know, and the
community feeling like it needed its own independent council. I think for the
auction proceeds process, I think that concern will probably be a little bit less,
at least I would hope so, especially with the new accountability mechanisms.
So thanks.

Paul Diaz:

Thanks, Keith. Becky?

Becky Burr:

So I also totally understand the concerns about the outside council. Just bear
in mind that for the purposes of the accountability review, there were some
very, very particular specialized requirements that couldn't be met by sort of
ordinary staff and it would probably have been inefficient. And also the
accountability CCWG felt pretty strongly that we needed a counsel that was
actually independent from ICANN, so. The same is not going to be the case
when it comes to the auction proceeds. There's just different issues at stake
there.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 22

Paul Diaz:

Jonathan?

Jonathan Robinson: I suppose two. One for the general point more or less in response to
Becky and others on that point. I mean I think the issue is less, to my mind,
about the specialism and the independent and more about management. And
I think there's some - my opinion is there's been some lessons learned about
more effective management, and in fact there are already some processes
put in place, as (Becky) and others will note. So I think that, you know, it's
clearly the quantum of the cost of a per-hour basis and how that's managed,
as well as the expertise and independence.

I don't know at this stage whether - what will be required, but just to Kristina's
point, there are a few mentions already in the charter about costs and cost
control. But they, on quick review with your point in mind and our experience
in mind, we could look at strengthening some of those.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you all. Other issues you want to raise from -- or Maxim, further?

Maxim Alzoba:

Yes just a small clarification. As I understand, those companies they charge
almost three prices. So this amount of money spent it could be some
negotiations or something. Because in the United States they have
thousands of more companies. Why this particular company?

Paul Diaz:

I'm not sure how the selection process for the outside counsel was made.
Again, certain expertise is needed so certain firms (unintelligible). Jonathan?

Jonathan Robinson: I mean I was around at the selection process to some extent, and there
was a pretty thorough check of expertise and it was done in conjunction with
ICANN. I suppose one of the other issues took place -- and I don't really want
to open up a can of worms or a debate on that -- but there were two firms
selected. It may be that it was, with hindsight that wasn't necessary. I can't
really comment on that. But that certainly would have contributed to costs.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 23

Paul Diaz:

Becky and then I have Jian and Jeff.

Becky Burr:

So there was a need for a very, very particular kind of legal expertise, which
was California non-for-profit law. We couldn't have done that work, and there
was one law firm that was brought in to do that. Then there was more general
work that that firm which really does essentially nothing but non-profit law
wasn't equipped to do.

I do think that the interplay between the two firms was not as well managed
as it could have been, but there was a vetting process. There was a pretty
elaborate vetting process. Several law firms were looked at. They were
interviewed. ICANN vetted them. Then the CCWG team looked at it as well.
So it wasn't just - I mean I think Jonathan's absolutely right. There are clear
lessons learned and there are clear controls being put into place.

But it's easy for us to say, you know, it's a really big number. I think, you
know, you have to look at sort of what the specialized expertise that was
needed. We really could not have done the work without that. But could it
have been managed better? Absolutely.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Becky. Jian?

Jian Zhang:

Jian Zhang from Knet. I actually have a question for Jeff Neuman. Last yesterday afternoon I was in the GAC. You were talking about the new gTLD
subsequent procedure. It seemed to me that there was a strong preference to
the brand, new gTLD and the geographic and new gTLD, but it seemed they
didn't like the sensitive string. Is that correct? Or is that some individual
members' ideas or GAC as a whole?

Jeff Neuman:

This is Jeff Neuman. I think there was some opinions expressed but I don't
think that any of the opinions were any kind of consensus. I think it was just
thoughts that were expressed. I was going to say on that session, you know,
Jordyn Buchanan raised a comment that he's raised here several times about

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 24

trying to move ahead more quickly on subsequent - well I guess Jordyn
Buchanan would say an ongoing process, the continual process.

I do think that if we are serious about that, we will need to as a group come
up with our own plan, not just make those kinds of statements, but come up
with a plan, pick out the things that we think do not need a policy process to
move forward, and then actually propose the way forward on some of the
implementation fixes.

One example could be, if we think -- and I know there were some differing
views at the GDD Summit -- but if we think accreditation of backend providers
is a good idea, then we can actually, being the most knowledgeable in that
subject, could draft that criteria and all of that kind of stuff. So it's just an
example, but I think if we're serious about it, we need to actually take the
steps ourselves and draft what needs to be drafted and not rely on ICANN
staff to do that kind of thing.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Jeff. Jordyn Buchanan?

Jordyn Buchanan: Yes thanks for raising that, Jeff. I was trying to figure out the right place in the
agenda to talk about this. You know, I - just looking at the presentations
yesterday, which in an hour and a half we didn't even have time to get
through all of the work streams that the PDP is working on, it's just - I mean I
think 2020 is a really optimistic date for a next round, just looking at the
amount of - I mean just, even if we get the PDP done at the end of 2017
seems impossible to me.

And, you know, the years of implementation that are going to need to come
on top of the level of policy changes that are envisioned by the current work
streams just strikes me as, you know, this is like a decade-long process or
something like that. And, you know, I started off thinking that there, you know,
there's some things that happened as part of the last round that probably
made sense to clean up. But at this point I'm just like it was good enough.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 25

Like there's - we weren't happy with some things, other folks from the
community weren't happy with some things, but none of it's so broken that it
needs the amount of time and effort that it's going to take to really tack to
relatively small changes and outcomes if we think about it.

I think there's some things that can be done totally independently of the policy
process about like how do we get - especially if we were in a continuous
mode on a first come, first serve basis, how do we get communities to apply.
That's really about encouraging communities to come in at that point as
opposed to giving them a specialty contention mechanism. How do we get
underserved regions to come in. You know, it's really about encouraging
them and giving them incentives and dealing with price issues and so on. It
doesn't need to be part of a policy process.

And so I think just getting back into like just saying like, "Hey we've got a
policy. We even have an implementation of it, let's go" strikes me as a much
more likely path forward and much more likely to actually serve - like people
were talking yesterday about how the community process didn't work. I
agree, the community process didn't work. The waiting eight years before
there's new TLDs isn't going to help any communities. It just means that they
don't get TLDs forever instead of sometime soon.

And so I totally agree with you, Jeff. We should take proactive, constructive
steps. But I just think the process has gotten totally away from us, and I know
that you've been working really hard to try to make it go as quickly as
possible. But I just don't think with the amount of content that you guys are
dealing with that there's any way to make it go at a reasonable pace just
based on how ICANN works.

Paul Diaz:

Jeff?

Jeff Neuman:

Yes it certainly is a lot to tackle, but again to the extent that we can actually
put pen to paper and draft things and then present them to - some of the

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 26

things that have to go through the PDP, to present it to them and say, "Here's
the strawman, let's go. Let's spend a week, attack it, two weeks attack it, fix it
up, put it out for comment or whatever we have to do." I think we can speed it
up tremendously.

But to the extent that we just complain about it and, you know, and I'm not
saying you're doing that, I'm just saying a lot of people at the GDD Summit
are upset about the timeline but then that's three months ago and nobody's
taking any steps to actually do something about it, or maybe it was only a
month ago. It seems like three months ago.

So I think if we take the proactive steps, draft the strawman, come up with
things that we think don't need to go through the policy process, present
fixes, even go and do things like change the actual wording in the guidebook
as to what we would recommend, putting that in front of people tends to
speed things along and actually gives the group something to look at tangible
as opposed to throwing out these questions, which today is going to be
another session of throwing out these overarching questions at 10:45 and
then the next session after that we'll be diving into the work streams. But it's
going to be a lot more of the same until we take some responsibility ourselves
and do it.

Paul Diaz:

Jordyn Buchanan?

Jordyn Buchanan: Yes so thanks, Jeff. I know I - that was a small part of what I said, and I totally
agree we need to do that. I totally agree with you. I actually think it would be
helpful to the extent people have time to try to get people that are interested
in this path forward to just spend some time thinking about what that would
like while we're here all together. And so I'm happy to try to drive that.

So I'll send a note out to the list or something like that and we can see if we
can choose a time when people have a little bit of space available on

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 27

calendars to maybe spend an hour or two just sort of working through what
that framework might look like.

Paul Diaz:

Go ahead, Jeff.

Jeff Neuman:

I think that's actually great. Sorry, Jeff Neuman. But I also think what worries
me too are the CCT Review Team worries me too in the sense that when
Jonathan Zuck's up there and he says, "We need to find out not just, you
know, the problems that people did apply, we need to find out why people
didn't apply at all. And so we need to get out there." That kind of stuff seems
to me to be so like how do you find people and we'll spend lots of money and
time trying to do this.

We need to rein that in as well and make sure that - anyone who talks to
Jonathan Zuck about the timeline of the CCT Review Team he says he
doesn't believe personally that there's any chance of meeting that. And I've
heard some of the discussions and I was on - I think you were in one group
and then (Larine) -- is that her name? -- was in another group and she's
going on about things that she wants to look at, which I think are very
valuable, but I think a lot of those could take a substantial amount longer than
the timeline that's in there. So how can we help you on that?

Jordyn Buchanan: Yes thanks, Jeff. I actually think Jonathan - like I know he's - he's pessimistic
about the current, the official schedule of getting done by the end of this year,
but I think the published schedule which has us sort of wrapping up by next
April, I think he's pretty committed to. And I think essentially what the CCT is
going to do is just triage work out that can't be - like we're just going to say,
"We can't get to these things that we can't do within that timeline."

I think we could still make the case - I think this will be a harder case for us to
make, but I think we could still make the case we don't even need the CCT to
complete before we move on to new allocations. But in reality, if we're going

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 28

to touch the guidebook at all, it's going to take about that amount of time
anyway. And it could certainly be done in parallel.

I think the only thing we're really waiting for from the CCT that's fundamental
to whether we proceed or not is the cost benefit analysis as to whether the
benefits of the program exceeded the cost. And I think probably the
community is waiting to at least see the answer to that question before
anyone's going to be willing to say like, "Yes let's do more of them."

Paul Diaz:

Jeff, can you remind me the questions that you, as one of the vice chairs, put
forward for the group? Does it - do the questions give us a clear opportunity
to weigh in with any input that Jordyn Buchanan and other interested parties
may want to know? Or they - I think they were a little different. So how do you
guys recommend whatever we come up with to try and move things forward
more expeditiously? How best procedurally do we get that done?

Jeff Neuman:

So I think there's one set of questions that asks about how TLDs should
move in the future, whether it should be rounds or something else. That
provides a little bit of an avenue to make the sort of statement we want. But I
do think it might be a supplemental - I think at the end there's this overarching
question is there anything we missed or anything you want to add, and I think
that's really the area where we hit home on some of these other points and
saying that we as a Registry Stakeholder Group will volunteer to lead
implementation efforts and to ensure that we do not go through the same
thing of, you know, taking years to finalize the policy and then, only then
starting to draft a new guidebook or whatever we end up calling up.

That we believe there should be an ongoing process and as issues are
resolved, they should - implementation on those issues should start right
away, or at least the drafting of the implementation measures should start
right away. So I think that's more kind of at the end in that last miscellaneous
question.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 29

Paul Diaz:

Okay. Thank you. Anymore on this issue? Statton?

Statton Hammock:

Statton Hammock with Rightside. No I was just going to mention one

other item under issues and actions, and we can table it for some other time if
you want to if we want to talk to ICANN staff. But at the IPC-Registry
Stakeholder Group meet up, we decided - the action item was to come up
with a small task force of representatives from each group to sit and talk
about interpretation or understanding around some of our obligations,
particularly Section 3.a. And there was an arbitrary cap of seven
representatives from each put forward. So I don't know if we want to do that
now but - or on the list at some point, but I just tag it and flag it for discussion.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Statton. And you beat me to it. I was going to insert that. I will
push to the list a call for volunteers. For anybody who couldn't be in
yesterday's session, honestly, sorry, you missed a good one. It was a good
debate and - but just an opening round. And one of the things that came out
and actually helped refine the thinking rather than just keep going on and on
about that particular issue -- it's an important one but I think there are more -both groups agreed to have a call for volunteers.

We chose the number seven arbitrarily. But it's just to craft or create the list,
what are the various issues that we want to discuss. Spec 11, 3.a, sure that's
the first, but there's plenty more that's in there. That's what this group will do.
So put a call out. A couple have already raised their hands, but we'll post it on
the list for anybody who missed or hasn't thought or isn't with us today. And
we'll look to convene a conference call on the second half of July to keep the
ball rolling.

And as we identify issues and get agreement around it, there will be a call
subsequently for folks who want to participate in whatever that particular
issue area is. And, you know, we'll kind of always feedback into the full group
updates on what's going on, what's being said. An opportunity to engage
more directly with IPC is probably a very good thing for our stakeholder

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 30

group, given the relative important or weight that they have within the ICANN
community, and very importantly the nature of the issues that they're raising
with us. Pam?

Pam Little:

Pam Little from Zodiac. Just a thought. I understand, or I know, the IPC also
met with Registrar Stakeholder Group and I was just wondering whether that
discussion should happen between registry, registrar and IPC rather than
they also have a subgroup talking about maybe some common issue, for
example anti-abuse measures and all that. I think that might be more
effective or efficient way to do it. Thanks.

Paul Diaz:

Agreed. Some of the issues definitely overlap. So let's identify the issues. I
wouldn't be surprised if they had their own seven-member working groups.
And then we'll compare the lists. Those that clearly benefit from a combined
contracted parties, we will do that combined. There's no point in duplicating
effort. Reg?

Reg Levy:

Thanks. I was in the Registrar IPC meeting as well and it was surprising to
me that the issues that they brought up were not the ones that they brought
up with us in terms of things relating to content, things relating to - it was just
- there seems to be a complete disconnect about what they think we're in
charge of and what they think the registrars are in charge of. So I think it
would be really helpful for the registries and registrars to, if there is such a
task force, have sort of a united front on this. Because I think we are united
and it definitely feels like the IPC is not certain what's going on.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Reg. Okay so we will be coming back. Look for that call and since
we have seven heads, that's what we agreed to, if we get more than that we'll
figure out some way -- maybe somebody, you know, agrees to step aside -however many we have. Yes. If we get less, we get less. I mean let's wait
and see what we get. And we do - we will coordinate certainly with the
registrars, and administratively they are in the process.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 31

Something I want to add, just a quick reminder, as far as elections go, the
registrars are currently - have their annual elections underway. Michele's
stepping down. He's term limited. Graeme Bunton is the presumptive next
chair. He's running unopposed. There will be a change in leadership there.
We have excellent relations with all those folks, so the registries and
registrars will continue to work very well together.

For ourselves, just a sort of tickler for people, this is an election year for us as
well. So this fall the Chair, Vice Chair of Policy and both Donna and Keith as
Councilors we're all up for election. We're all eligible to run again. What we'll
be doing is shortly after the Labor Day holiday we'll issue the call for
volunteers and secondings and all of that. We usually have our elections in
early October and then the election results are announced at the end of the
annual general meeting. If there's any change or those newly elected folks
take their office then in India.

So it's coming. I'm not going to go into any detail right now. Just be aware.
Anybody who may be interested in running, I'm happy to talk about any of the
positions, the qualifications, requirements, things like that. There will be more
to come, but just kind of a tickler for folks. Jonathan?

Jonathan Robinson: Paul, before you run those elections, I suggest we run a referendum as to
whether or not we break away from ICANN.

Paul Diaz:

Who's got a good acronym? Brexit or ICANN exit?

Cyrus Namazi:

I think we should have ICANN run away from you.

Paul Diaz:

Don't they already? Jeff?

Jeff Neuman:

Yes I think just as a tickler as well we should probably start talking about to
avoid the whole GNSO Council chair thing that happened the last time, we
should probably prepare ourselves in advance to figure out what our going in

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 32

position is and what we're going to do or if there's any discussions. I don't
know, Donna, at the council level I know it's early it would still be good to
avoid what happened the last time.

Paul Diaz:

Yes it may be a little early for that but a good point, Jeff. Let's avoid it if we
can. It kind of dovetails what we have on the agenda, jumping - we've already
talked about the budget. Please those of you who haven't voted, you know
who you are, cast your fricking vote. Cherie?

Cherie Stubbs:

We're up to 30.

Paul Diaz:

Woo-hoo. Thank you to four of you this morning. The other issue for our
councilors who are here, I know council's already had their sessions, but
anything to share with the group? Anything that's come up this week or in
your near term you want to raise before our next call on the 13th? I don't
know if there's any issues? Donna?

Donna Austin:

Yes thanks, Paul. Donna Austin. Mason's still here. We had an interesting
discussion with the board about the resolution of the outstanding stuff with
the temporary reservations for Red Cross associated names, whatever, and
also IGO acronyms. And there's a little bit of a misunderstanding of process I
think. I get the sense that the board is trying to not put themselves in a
position of rejecting GAC advice or rejecting PDP recommendations. So
they're trying to a do a workaround, and that workaround is going around and
around.

Mason and I have actually well kind of butted in to some extent. Chris
Disspain has had a kind of working group with IGOs for some period of time. I
think it's been going on for about two years, and they're going to make
tomorrow -- and Mason and I are going to join that conversation. We've had
no visibility into that for two years, so.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 33

I understand that Chris is trying to come up with something that might work or
be reasonable for the IGOs but we don't have a sense of what that is. So
Mason and I will be part of that conversation. But it still doesn’t really address
the potential problem that we think they either have to - the board has to
reject the GAC advice or reject the PDP recommendations. I don't know
where the workaround comes in. So I think that's still something that has to
be sorted through. Chuck, you might have - I know you had some discussion
about that with Whois yesterday. You might have some insight into that.
Thanks.

Paul Diaz:

Please, Chuck. And then Jeff.

Chuck Gomes:

Yes I was disturbed listening to that session with the board, as you know. It's
really pretty simple. The - except that the board's not taken advantage of the
simplicity. And I think everybody on the GNSO Council recognizes this. The
board's not a policy development body, neither is the GNSO Council. So the
board has either to accept or reject or to send it back to the council. And the
council can send it back to the working group. Now this is a really old working
group. It's one that I was on in fact. But that's really the options if there are
significant changes being made to the recommendations.

And I think, and it's not my place to tell the board this, but the council may
want to communicate this, it seems to me as long - that the GAC's
expectations are that the board can overrule policy and accommodate their what they want. And if they would set the record straight on that that they
don't develop policy, it'd be a lot easier for them. So anyway, I know you
understand that so I'm talking to the choir. But until the GAC's expectations
are changed, they're going to keep having this problem and will have it with
the proxy privacy issues, which is coming up now as well.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Chuck. Jeff and we've got like two minutes folks.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 34

Jeff Neuman:

Sorry. So Jeff Neuman. We need to just tell the board to vote. I know that
Chris Disspain basically his view is well you don't want us to reject the
GNSO, and actually I do. Because then there are certain things that get
triggered. I do think that in fact the bylaws do prescribe a timeframe in which
they're supposed to vote, and they've totally ignored those. They have to vote
both on the GAC advice and ours, and we should make a clear statement to
the board that we are not afraid of how you come out of it.

We have our own accountability measures to deal with that if you vote the
GNSO down. But there is some view that the board keeps saying, and I've
heard it from several, "Well you don't want us to vote it down." Actually I do. I
want you to vote, and they don't want to vote. They don’t want to create the
controversy.

Donna Austin:

Yes thanks, Jeff. I agree. I think what they're trying to do is make a nondecision and put it on somebody else. But that's just not an option. I would
actually think in this case that if the GAC advice is inconsistent with the
GNSO recommendations, the board is actually in a pretty solid position to
reject that GAC advice and go with the PDP recommendations. But, you
know, they don't want to trigger that process because it would take too long
to get through it. But we're two years down the road now.

Paul Diaz:

Okay all.

Jeff Neuman:

Sorry, Jeff Neuman. Just to quote, the bylaws say, "The board will meet to
discuss the recommendation as soon as feasible, preferably not later than the
second meeting after receipt of the board report." And then it talks about the
vote. So we're at how many years after now?

Paul Diaz:

Understood. Kristina, a quick thought?

Kristina Rosette: Just following up on this, I realize we're way beyond the possibility of a
GNSO Council motion on this, but it would seem to me that it might worth

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:33 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995666
Page 35

teeing up for the next council meeting, you know, perhaps a motion by the
council calling on the board to act expeditiously and referring both them and
GAC to the relevant provision of the bylaw. I mean, you know, the other
solution is you just make a copy of the PDP section of the bylaws and put it
on the chair of every GAC member, but I don't think that's going to get your
very far.

Donna Austin:

I think from a council perspective, we have some follow up as a result of the
discussion we had with the board and we're - I think we're going to draft a
letter to send it back and say, "These are your options." And this is our
process. We can't do a workaround, so. I think that's the intent.

Paul Diaz:

Okay. Thank you all. There's another meeting that will be setting up so we
have to end this session today. We had a very full agenda. You'll note GDD
staff's with us. We didn't have a direct exchange because of our full agenda.
We're on a regular schedule so our next biweekly call will be on the 13th, so
two weeks from now. Issues that folks wanted to raise with staff, I'd ask
please get them into us. We'd like provide staff a head's up of what those
items may be a week in advance. So a week from today, anything you want
to raise on the next call on the 13th.

With that, thank you for coming out early and good session. We'll see you all
around.

Cherie Stubbs:

For those who did come into the room late, there is - there's a fair amount of
food left so if you want to grab a snack on the way out feel free. And we can
stop the recording now, please. Thank you everyone.

END

