HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 13:30 to 15:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

LISE FUHR:

British member of the parliament. Talked to her before the
Brexit, which was very interesting, and she actually gave me a
reference to a poem that I'm going to read aloud for you. I think
it's a good poem, and I think we need to recall us the objective of
the poem, It's actually the British poet called Yeats who in 1990
wrote this. He actually wrote it to describe the atmosphere of
post-war Europe. I'm using this to describe the post-Brexit and
to remind us to actually stick together. It's called The Second
Coming. We have to be a little intellectual today. Sorry about
that. It is unusual. It's called The Second Coming, and it reads
like this:
"Turning and turning in the whitening gyre, the falcon cannot
hear the falconer. Things fall apart; the center cannot hold. Mere
anarchy is loosened upon the world. The blood-dimmed tide is
loosed, and everywhere, the ceremony of innocence is drowned.
The best lack all the convictions, while the worst are full of
passionate intensity."
And I think we should use this poem to remind us to find
compromises, not to become too ideological. I think that’s the

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

same within this community. Find compromises, guys, be
constructive, and I'd actually like to end with a reminder to
focus on another famous group of poems who are saying
"Always look at the bright side of life." Those are also British.
Sorry for this British lecture, but I couldn’t let the chance go.
Inspired by Giovanni who just entered the group. Actually,
Maarten is saying now he understands why we need one and a
half hours. He has been complaining that this is too much time.
I'm not responsible for the amount of time. I'm responsible for
fulfilling the time, so that’s why it's going to be a long session,
guys. No. I will go on with the slides, and as you can see, I will
not be talking all the time. I will actually only be talking for a
couple of more minutes.
We should have had Trang here. I don't know where she is.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

We'll look for her.

LISE FUHR:

We'll look for her. Good. Then we have Katrina, who will actually
–

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Page 2 of 43

Oh, there she is.

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

LISE FUHR:

EN

Oh, that’s good. She's the Chair of GRC, which is not Secret
Service. I don’t know what the acronym –

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Guidelines Review Committee.

LISE FUHR:

Yes.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

It's a Guidelines Review Committee. It works on our internal
procedures.

LISE FUHR:

That’s good, and we actually have Maarten Simon who will give
us a perspective on the PTI Bylaws and the contract and the
service level expectations. Hi! Those guys will actually take us
through those very interesting subjects.
I'll just give you a brief overview of the timeline: as you can see,
actually, we have been through most of it, and the key point is
on the 9th of June, we actually had the proposal endorsed by
NTIA. It was very important it was not approved, it was

Page 3 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

endorsed. Then we have the next big deadline, is the ICANN
implementation report that is to be sent to NTIA.
So that’s actually why we're here today, to get some clarity on
where we are, and as you might know, the purpose of the CWG
was to make a proposal for the transition. We decided then to
become the group that also was overseeing the actual
implementation and worked with ICANN staff on this.
On top of that, because in Marrakech we felt that things were
moving really fast and we didn't want to slow things down, we
created what we call IOTF, which is the Implementation Task
Force. We had Design Teams within the CWG, and those Design
Team leads, Jonathan Robinson and I are working closely
together with Trang and [Yuko] on actually having quick
feedback and quick turnarounds on how to implement the
proposal as such. While we're meeting almost every week and
things are moving really fast because as you can see the
deadline is in August – Yes?

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

May I ask a question? Is it 12th August or 15th August?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

15 August.

Page 4 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

TRANG NGUYEN:

EN

It was 12 August. However, with the recent publication of the
NTIA report, they have also moved up our due day for the
implementation report to August 12. So what was previously
August 15th is now an August 12 due date.

LISE FUHR:

Very good date. It's my birthday.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

It's Saturday. It's Saturday, isn't it?

TRANG NGUYEN:

I believe it's a Friday. I believe that’s a Friday, as opposed to
what was a Monday.

LISE FUHR:

Okay, good. As you know, the proposal was set to meet the five
criteria you see below. It has to support and enhance the
multistakeholder model, maintain the security, meet the
expectations of the customers, maintain the openness and not
be replaced by any government-led solution. This was endorsed
by the NTIA that the report met all these criteria, which was
really nice and good for us. So why are we here today?

Page 5 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

The report is endorsed. We have a couple of outstanding issues,
and I was asked to actually highlight the main issues. Apart from
the CSC, which Katrina is going to talk about, we have four big
chunks that we're looking into, and one of them is PTI Bylaws.
Those are almost finalized. We have the PTI and ICANN contract.
That’s also in progress. It's not finalized yet. I guess Trang and
[Yuko] will go through those.
We have the staffing of PTI, which created a little fuss within the
group because the first proposal was to only have a secondment
of staff to PTI, and that created some tractions in the different
communities. Now the solution is actually to do it in a two-step
way. The first step is the secondment, and then we will, within
three years, employ staff within PTI. I guess that will be
explained, too.
Then the last point is actually IANA IPR, which is slowly waiting
on the naming community – that’s us – and the numbering and
the protocols to agree on how to make the actual contract
between the parties, how to have the legal thing sorted out. It's
not something that's creating a big attention within this group,
but it is taking some time for Johnson and me. With that, I will
actually hand it over to you.

Page 6 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

TRANG NGUYEN:

EN

Thank you, Lise. While the slides are getting loaded, thank you
very much Lise and the ccNSO council for inviting us here today
to provide you with an update on the work of the
implementation and the transition. Could I perhaps have the …?
Thank you. Where do I point? Yeah, maybe.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

I always [inaudible]

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

No, you go to the [right here].

TRANG NGUYEN:

Oh, there we go. So for us today, I wanted to share with you
some updates on a few key areas that’s going to be of most
interest to this group.
The first slide that we have here for you is a slide that we've used
and have shared with the community for quite some time now.
This is a summaries view of the 15 implementation projects that
we have, mapped across three tracks. The first track has to do
with the root zone management, the second track having to do
with the various recommendations that were in the ICG proposal
from the three operational communities, and then the third

Page 7 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

track have to do with recommendations that were in the CCWG
Accountability proposal.
As you can see, what we've done there is show you the progress
that we've made in terms of implementation planning since
ICANN 55. As you can see, we have made progress in all of these
projects during the time that has elapsed between ICANN 55 and
today.
Lise was alluding to the PTI earlier today, and this is one of the
main areas of recommendation coming out of the CWG
stewardship proposal, which is the creation of a new legal entity
called PTI that would essentially perform not just the naming
function, but we have agreed with the community that PTI
would also perform the numbering and the protocol parameters
functions as well.
PTI will essentially be a separate legal entity from ICANN. ICANN
would be the sole member of PTI, so in common commercial
terms, PTI would be a wholly owned subsidiary of ICANN. It
would be domiciled in California and would have a 501(c)(3)
status, which in the state of California is the equivalent of a
nonprofit. As you can see, being a separate legal entity, PTI
would have its own board, and in accordance with the CWG
Stewardship proposal, the board would be made up of five
individuals.

Page 8 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

EN

Yes, I'm sorry, may I ask you to slow down, because most of our
audience, they're not native speakers. Thank you.

TRANG NGUYEN:

Thank you for that reminder. The PTI board, as I mentioned, will
have five individuals. Three will be appointed from either ICANN
staff or PTI staff, and two will be appointed by the ICANN
NomCom. Since the 2016 NomCom process is already well
underway, we, the group within the IOTF as well as the CWG
Stewardship have agreed that Jonathan and Lise would serve as
the interim directors until the 2017 NomCom process could elect
two independent directors for the PTI board. In terms of officers
for PTI, there will be three officers. There will be a president of
PTI, a treasurer and a secretary.
The position of the president of PTI is contemplated to be a
seconded individual from ICANN, whereas the treasurer and the
secretary are board support positions, if you would, and they're
not expected to be full time positions. They're currently
contemplated to be direct share resources from ICANN. So in
other words, ICANN would provide a resource to serve in those
two roles for PTI.

Page 9 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

Staffing of PTI, as Lise mentioned earlier, our initial proposal
was to have all PTI staff be seconded from ICANN to perform the
IANA functions, the services, and that secondment would apply
on an ongoing basis. In other words, any new employees of PTI
would be hired by ICANN and seconded to PTI. That proposal
received some mixed feedback from the community. There were
some in the community that were in support of that approach.
However, there were some in the community that expressed
certain concerns with that approach, mainly that that would not
achieve the desired separation between ICANN and PTI as
contemplated by the CWG Stewardship proposal.
ICANN considered very carefully the feedback that we received
from the community, both those in support of the proposal and
those that raised concerns, and to really think through the
rationale for why there was support and why there were
concerns raised, and we proposed a revised approach which
was intended to bridge the gap a bit.
And the revised approach that we have is at the time of
transition, which is on October 1st, we will second the IANA staff
to PTI to perform their services. After the transition, ICANN
would work to put in place benefits programs that will be either
exactly the same, or as equivalent as possible to the benefits
program that we currently have in place for ICANN staff. We
would work to put in place a comparable benefits program for

Page 10 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

PTI, and we would also work to put in place processes and
systems to support things like payroll and HR and benefits
administration and other processes.
We'll work to put those in place, and once those are in place, but
no later than three years, then we would require PTI to offer
employment to all of the seconded employees. Once those
systems and processes are in place, then PTI on a move forward
basis can then hire its own employees as well. That’s the revised
proposal that we have circulated just before the ICANN 56
meeting, and from initial feedback that we have received, I think
everyone that had previously raised a concern is in support of
the proposal, so I think we potentially have a path forward there.
I covered the legal status of PTI and the services of PTI as well.
From an operations perspective, there's this concept of shared
services. As a brand new legal entity, obviously there are a
couple of options of how to structure that organization. It could
have its own HR department, its own legal department, etc., but
for the size of the organization that PTI is going to be, that’s not
necessarily a very effective way of doing it. What we're
proposing is a shared services approach where ICANN would
continue to provide those critical shared services for PTI in order
for it to carry out its work. Then of course, once the PTI board is
in place post-transition, they can review the shared services

Page 11 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

arrangement as well as the staffing arrangement and all of that,
and decide what, if any, changes they want to make.
So how do we make all of this work? It's contemplated that we
would have, at minimum, four contracts between ICANN and
PTI. There would be a contract between ICANN and PTI for the
performance of the naming function, and then ICANN will also
be subcontracting the protocol parameters and numbering
services to PTI. Those will be two separate subcontracting
agreements, and then there would be an intercompany services
agreement between ICANN and PTI, and that’s the contract
where the details of the secondment and the shared services
arrangement would be detailed.
At minimum, there will be those four contracts. There may be
additional contracts. For example, as an outcome of the IANA
IPR discussions, there may be an additional contract between
the ICANN and PTI to allow PTI to use the IANA trademark in the
performance in its work. This graphic gives you sort of a picture
of what the post-transition landscape would look like. In the
middle there, you would have ICANN, and then as you can see
there, there would be various contracts between ICANN and PTI.
PTI would perform the three IANA functions, and then ICANN via
the ICANN Bylaws would have a customer service standing
committee that would perform oversight of the performance of

Page 12 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

the naming function. Basically, what that means is that the CSC
will, on a monthly basis, review performance reports from PTI to
make sure that it is performing in accordance to the service
levels that is set out in the contract between ICANN and PTI, and
then escalate any performance issues that it identifies to the
ccNSO and GNSO.
As you can see, the arrangements between ICANN and PTI will
occur via a contract with both the IETF and with the RIRs. Then
ICANN would in turn subcontract the performance of those
services to PTI. Oversight of those performance for those two
communities are specified in the contracts that we have with
them.
I mentioned briefly that the Customer Service Standing
Committee or the CSC will perform oversight of PTI's
performance of the naming function and determine whether or
not PTI is delivering services in accordance with the service level
agreements. Those service level agreements are something that
we're working on.
It's actually one of the things that we've been working on for the
last several months. That project is the names SLE project as we
called it, and there is a Design Team within the CWG that
specifically is looking at this. What we had to do with this project
is essentially ICANN had to make some code changes to our root

Page 13 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

zone management system to be able to collect data the new way
that the SLE Design Team has determined that we need to
collect.
Those code changes had been done and deployed back in
March, so we had been collecting data in accordance to the new
performance targets that the names SLE Design Team had
defined for us. With now about three months of data that we've
collected, we've started to aggregate them and analyze them in
order to come up with a set of what we think are the appropriate
service level agreements for the performance of the naming
function. We're on track to do that and present that back to the
names SLE Design Team in around mid-July.
Then in addition to that, we'll also be building a real time
dashboard, where we would, on a real time basis, report on the
performance of the naming services against those performance
targets that we would agree upon with the CWG. So the
Customer Standing Committee – and I know Katrina is going to
talk about this a little bit – but essentially, like I mentioned, it is
going to be an oversight body and it's going to monitor PTI's
performance against the service level agreement that’s in the
contract between ICANN and PTI. The composition of the CSC, as
you can see, is on the slide there. The members of the CSC will
be selected by the Registries Stakeholder Group, and also by the

Page 14 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

ccNSO. In addition to that, they will also have liaisons from other
SOs and ACs.
The other body that will be coming out of the CWG Stewardship
proposal is what's called a root zone evolution review
committee, and this committee's main purpose is to look at and
evaluate any architectural or operational changes to the root
zone and make recommendations essentially to the ICANN
board on those matters. This is a replacement of a responsibility
that’s currently under the NTIA, so currently, any major
architectural changes to the root zone we have to obtain NTIA
approval for. Post-transition, it will be this group, the RZERC that
will consider those types of changes and then make
recommendations to the ICANN board, and then the ICANN
board would have ultimate responsibility for approval.
Where we are with the RZERC is we’ve worked with the IOTF and
the CWG on creating a charter for this committee. That is now
currently posted for public comment, so after the public
comment window closes, we will consider any comments
received and then go present it to the ICANN board. Then after
ICANN board's adoption, we would initiate the process to start
forming this committee.
IANA IPR, as Lise mentioned, this is the work that’s currently
undertaken by the three operational communities, and there's

Page 15 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

quite a bit of work and effort that’s been put into this. I think
what's going to need to be done, as Lise said, is ultimately
agreements and contracts will have to be drafted between the
operational communities and the IETF Trust to define the
arrangement there, and then that would have to be in place
before the transfer of the IPR occur.
We have a slide here that has some links for you in terms of how
you can engage and contribute to the various implementation
activities that are going on. There's public comment that’s
currently open for the Root Zone Evolution Review Committee
charter, as I mentioned. Under the CCWG Accountability track,
we currently have the ICANN restated articles of incorporation
that’s out of public comment, and then you can volunteer as
well through the CSC, as Katrina will talk about in just a minute.
You can also participate in these mailing lists and follow the
various discussions that are going on.

LISE FUHR:

Thank you, Trang. I actually would like to highlight something
because you showed very nicely how the contracts are going to
be divided into four contracts, but we have an issue that we
want to look into regarding the intercompany agreement and
dividing it from the naming function contract. We're going to
have [inaudible] look into this because the ICANN Bylaws covers

Page 16 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

certain parts of the contract. We want to be sure that it covers
both the naming function contract and the intercompany
agreement because that’s very important in relation to how easy
it can be changed. This is incorporated into the Bylaws that the
contract needs hearing of the communities and that there needs
to be a majority, etc. For us, it's important that we have the
same protection for both contracts, but it's not solved yet, so we
will look into that.
Thank you, Trang, for a very comprehensive presentation. I don't
know if we should take a few questions. I've been told that when
Göran arrives, we would –
Yes, I saw he's there, so after Trang and questions, we will – yes.
Are there any questions for Trang now? Because I think we
should finish that before we – okay. Okay, thank you. Thank you,
Trang. Could you give us a tentative date when RZERC must be
in place?

TRANG NGUYEN:

RZERC should be in place by September 30th.

LISE FUHR:

Any other questions for Trang while she's here? Very quiet. We
had too much lunch or just too tired. Yes, that’s a question. Go
ahead.

Page 17 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

EN

[inaudible] .an, ccTLD. So this organization, PTI, was created
only to have a supervisor as ICANN, in face of ICANN? Why it was
necessary to create additional organization?

LISE FUHR:

I don’t think we should ask Trang about that question because
that’s the CWG who made the proposal. The idea behind having
the legal separation was that if PTI or IANA didn't perform and
there was repetitive misperformance, it would be easier to
separate it. It was to actually ensure that if things really went
wrong, it would take years to do the separation because it was
all built into ICANN. This is an affiliate of ICANN, so it's still
owned by ICANN as such, but it's a legal separation.
Any other questions? If not, I'll actually make a pause in the
session and hand it over to Katrina to do a short presentation of
the new – I don't know if it's that new anymore. I can see you
have a question before.

PETER VERGOTE:

Hi, good afternoon, Peter Vergote from .be. It's not so much a
question, but I think it would be interesting for the group that we
just zoom in a bit on what is understood behind proposed
architectural, operational changes to the root zones, which is on

Page 18 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

the plate of RZERC, and which might be other decisions that can
be made by PTI on its own. Thanks.

TRANG NGUYEN:

Thank you for the question. I think if there are any members that
were in the previous Design Team that came up with the RZERC
concept here that could add to provide an explanation for that,
please chime in. I think what we're trying to get to here is that
this committee would consider essentially any issues or
anything that would come up, that would have an impact on the
root zone itself and the technical management of the root zone
itself. I think they want to make sure that it's quite broad what
could be brought to the group, and then the group itself would
review and determine what issues it wants to take on.

LISE FUHR:

Thank you, Trang. I'd like to add that actually within the CSC, if
you want to have other service level expectations, it's the CSC
who actually review the SLE and is overseeing that PTI is
performing according to that. You have to make the distinction
between the more day-to-day operational part, and this is more
the fundamental technical part of the PTI functions that we
don’t want to be changed without any very thorough analysis.

Page 19 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

SIMON MCCALLA:

EN

Hi there, Simon McCalla, .uk. I think this is really important and
it's great. I think what we've got to be careful as a community,
the root zone needs to be managed under service level
agreements and managed like a contract. We need to make sure
that we're not trying to manage this by feelings, and one of the
dangers of setting up lots of supervisory committees is
ultimately, we need to judge this arrangement by how IANA is
managing to its service level agreements and its contracts. It's
important to have oversight but not create yet another body
that just spends a lot of time talking about issues that
fundamentally are contract – either the contract is being acted
out, or it's not, and I think that’s really important. This needs to
be lightweight and it needs to be nimble, and not be another
burdensome sort of bureaucracy, if that makes sense. Thank
you.

LISE FUHR:

Well, point taken, and that’s also what we try to do in the
charter.

TRANG NGUYEN:

Yes. I think some very smart people sort of thought this through,
and I think in the charter, the CSC charter, there's requirement
for the review of the CSC charter in a year's time after the
transition. I think there is already built into it a mechanism to

Page 20 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

review the effectiveness of the CSC itself shortly after the
transition.

LISE FUHR:

Okay, any other issues, questions for Trang? I'm glad we got
some questions. That’s good, you're still awake. Nice. Well, then
I'll hand it over to Katrina to actually introduce – or to welcome,
sorry – a guy who actually took the other way. He went from the
telco business to the domain name world, I've gone the other
way.

KATRINA SATAKI:

On behalf of the ccNSO, I'd like to welcome our new – or as Lise
put, not so new – also, I won't use the word old – CEO of ICANN.
So if you would like to say some words.

GÖRAN MARBY:

[inaudible]

KATRINA SATAKI:

Yes, of course.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

If you’re not shy.

Page 21 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

EN

Actually, I’m really shy.
I didn't really plan to say anything because I'm here to learn. I
have [inaudible] all the time, and I'm still trying to understand
everything. The team that I have working with this is an amazing
team, and there are a lot of things that have to be happening.
The reason why I wanted to attend this session was really to
hear your reactions, to listen. Because we have a very tight time
schedule, there is many things to do, and all the yellow flags we
have, we just have to address them. So this, for me, is like a way
that you ask questions and we really make sure we have the
right answers so we don’t miss anything. I was here just
listening.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Thank you very much.

GÖRAN MARBY:

Thank you, have fun.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Thank you, so back to Lise.

Page 22 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

LISE FUHR:

EN

Oh, thank you, Katrina. Trang, you're welcome to stay, you're
welcome to leave. It's up to you what you want to do with your
time, but we will continue. Yes, the ICANNExit. No. Sorry, no.
Thank you, Trang, again, and I would actually like to underline
that I think the cooperation on this is really good between the
Implementation Team and CWG. I'd like you to know that we're
very satisfied with the way it's working. Thank you, and we'll
move over to Katrina, giving us a presentation on the CSC.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Yes, thank you very much, Lise. Thank you, Trang, again. I hope
that you have received the information we've prepared for the
community. I sent two e-mails trying to alert you and give some
initial information on the Customer Standing Committee. Today,
we'll try to answer all the questions you might have, and I'll give
you a hopefully clearer picture. So as you understand now, as
already mentioned by Trang, so what will change? We'll have
some structural changes post-transition. As you can see, there is
a Customer Standing Community in the lower right corner.
The main purpose and the tasks of the Customer Standing
Community will be to ensure that IANA naming function has
been performed in satisfactory manner, and it works for the
direct customers. That is us. We as ccTLDs are direct customers
of IANA naming function. The other thing that the CSC is going to

Page 23 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

do, they will perform regular monitoring of IANA naming
function against the contract. In case they identify some existing
or potential problems, they will work together with PTI to
actually solve those issues.
Again, the composition of the Customer Standing Committee
will have members with the voting rights, and liaisons who will
liaise, basically. On members, we have two members from gTLD
registry operators. These members will be appointed by the
Registries Stakeholder Group or from the GNSO, and two ccTLD
registry operators and they will be appointed by the ccNSO.
Together, members and liaisons make a full slate, so when we
refer to full slate, it mean voting members and liaisons.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible]

KATRINA SATAKI:

Sorry? Slate, not slave. They will be slaves to the community, but
yes, slate. Here, as you now know, the deadline shifted a little
bit, so the final deadline will be 10th of August. The ccNSO
council did adopt the guideline explaining how we are going to
select the members. At the end of this meeting, we will issue the
call for expressions of interest, and those who are interested to

Page 24 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

serve on this community will have two weeks' time to submit
their expressions of interest.
Then, the ccNSO councilors will evaluate the applications
received, and in consultation with the Registries Stakeholder
Group, we will come up with four members. These members
have to be submitted by 22nd July. All other communities that
will appoint their liaisons also have to submit the names by
22nd July. Basically, ICANN secretary will collect all the names,
and when all the names are collected, they will send them to
ccNSO and GNSO councils. Again, in consultation between these
two bodies, we will come up with a full slate and will adopt the
full slate. So both councils will have to adopt the full slate of
CSC.
If we talk about the guidelines, if you go to the ccNSO website,
you can find the actual text of the guideline. It explains the
process and all the requirements, but I'll try to highlight some of
them here. So this election process, first of all, requirements. It's
good if you're committed and want to serve, but there are
certain skills that you need to serve on this committee.
First and utmost is you need experience and knowledge of the
IANA naming function, and you of course need some analytical
skills, experience in other committees, ability to be engaged in
diplomatic discussions – so I for one cannot be on that

Page 25 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

committee – consensus driven decision-making and things like
that, and of course, excellent communication skills because you
will need to communicate with the community, with others on
this committee, and PTI and other bodies that will be involved in
the process. It means that you also need to be able to
communicate in written and spoken English, just to make things
easier.
Some additional requirements: again, you need to commit to
active participation on this committee and you should be
employed or have active backing by a ccTLD manager. Also, the
council will have to apply some diversity criteria on the top of
the skillset. Of course, again, the professional criteria are most
important, and then we also consider diversity.
Please note two things: if you want to join the committee just to
receive travel funding, no, there's no travel funding, so it's just
work and no fun of traveling. Just work, yes. Another thing is
quite serious time commitment. Maybe not so much in terms of
time, but there are monthly meetings, and you're supposed to
attend at least nine meetings a year and do not miss more than
two consecutive meetings.
Then you also of course need to provide updates to
constituencies, to groups whenever you're asked to provide
updates and so on. Of course, I think we should normally expect

Page 26 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

that in the beginning there will be much more work, because
you need to set up all the procedures and decide how are you
going to work. The most important thing: you do not have to be
a ccNSO member to apply, so it's very important. Any ccTLD, if
you feel confident, if you fulfill the requirements, if you commit
to the work of the Customer Standing Committee, you're
welcome to apply.
Next steps, once more: We'll have a call for expression of interest
from 30 June until 15 July, then ccNSO council selection until
July 20, coordination with Registries Stakeholder Group
approximately on 21st July, and the appointment of the CSC
members on 22nd July. Then both councils will start working on
the full slate.
Again, I tried to be as brief as possible. If you have any questions,
something is not clear, please ask now because in two days we'll
have this call of expression out. It will be a PDF you can fill in
easily. Now if you go to the guideline, you can see in appendix A
the form you'll need to fill in. It will be made easier for you to fill
in. Any questions?

LISE FUHR:

I actually have a comment. Jonathan and I talked to the GAC
earlier today about exactly the CSC because they are to have a
liaison if they want, it's voluntary, so it's not mandatory for GAC.

Page 27 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

What we told them was that the first year is going to be very
interesting in the sense that this is where the work of the CSC
will be formed. This is where you actually fulfill the frame that
the charter is giving the group. It's a very important year, so I
really hope that some of you would put in the time. I think it's
going to be time consuming, but it's also going to be very
rewarding, I believe. Thank you.

KATRINA SATAKI:

So if you want to be rewarded...

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Rewarding.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Rewarding, yes. Are there any questions, or everything is so
clear? Perfect, okay. [Irina].

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Sorry, probably I have missed some of your explanation, but
when you mentioned a monthly meeting, is it anticipated that
it's going to be in person meeting or online meeting or
whatever?

Page 28 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

KATRINA SATAKI:

EN

Teleconferences. Yes, calls, monthly calls, but you're supposed
to be at least on nine calls a year and do not miss more than two
calls in a row.

LISE FUHR:

I guess that during the ICANN meetings, there will be some face
to face meetings for the group. I think most will be, as Katrina
says, calls, but there will be a need for physical meetings too.
But this is, again, up to the CSC as such to define in more details
because we only wanted to give the direction and of course the
objective of the group, but not the final procedure on how to
deal with the meetings and other things.

KATRINA SATAKI:

And one more comment: the Guidelines Review Committee is
currently working on a new guideline. It’s for RZERC. It will be
much easier than the one for CSC because we do not need all
this coordination work, but still, we need one person to point to
RZERC.

LISE FUHR:

No other questions? Well, that’s proceeding very fast. We have
Maarten, who will actually go through the PTI contract, the PTI
Bylaws and also put in IPR. Great.

Page 29 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible]

LISE FUHR:

Okay, take it away, Maarten.

MAARTEN SIMON:

Yes, I will, and I see we have – or I have – more than an hour left.
No, that’s not true. More than half an hour left, and I'll have to
make it short, as I didn't foresee that Trang would present
everything that I wanted to say about the Bylaws and the
contract, so we better go, if possible, to slide number four, I
think.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

[inaudible]

MAARTEN SIMON:

I didn't know that. Now I understand why it takes so much time.
Yes, this is the one. I want to tell you something that is finished
work and that is I think very positive for the [CSC] members, the
ccTLDs. In the work of the CWG we in the end drafted an annex C
that contains some details about how the relationship would be
between PTI and the TLD operators, and it took a number of
things from the original IANA contract. What is there now? If you

Page 30 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

want to see it, and you want to see the details of it, you better
use the link that I've put in. It’s [detailed]. There are a number of
clauses that will go into two things: Into the Bylaws of PTI, and
also in the contract between ICANN and PTI, so it's double. I can
go through the details here.
First of all, the first article says that all decisions and actions of
PTI shall comply with local law of the ccTLD, except – of course,
there is an except – if that would force PTI to violate its own
laws. It's your own law that dominates. Second thing is that PTI
cannot – and this is something that I think it's in the IANA
contract now – cannot make changes to the ccTLD policies and
procedures without the consent of the impacted registry.
The next thing that’s also nice to have is that PTI will not
discriminate between types of registries. Registries that have a
contract, that don’t have a contract, that are gTLDs, ccTLDs, all
are treated equal. The next thing is that PTI will not require now,
or in the future, a contract in order to provide services to ccTLD
registries. This is also directly from the contract that NTIA has
now. PTI will not impose additional requirements unless directly
and demonstrably – difficult word for me – linked to the global
security, stability or resilience of the domain name system.
So it's what it is, and nothing will change. We don’t have to get
anything extra, unless the whole security, stability and

Page 31 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

resilience, but that’s not something that will change very much
now. These clauses are defined now, and I must compliment
Paul Kane because he has helped us a lot in this. They will be, as
I said, both in the contracts and in the Bylaws, so there to stay.
That’s all I had to say about this, and all the other things I had to
say were said already. Thank you for that. Any questions?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Obviously, this is an overview of the exact language.

MAARTEN SIMON:

Yes, that’s why I had the link in this presentation because you
have to go to the exact text. We could discuss it, we have time
now, but I don’t have it in the presentation, so it's a bit difficult.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

I won't discuss this in detail, but I see two of those very serious
problems. Obviously, as I haven't read the precise, literal
language of what's in the PTI proposal, then I can't comment in
detail about this, but let me tell you what your presentation is
giving the perception of to me at this point. First of all, it says the
local law of the ccTLD. There's a complete misunderstanding
there of the fact that ccTLDs do not map to local law. My own
country has something like four jurisdictions, so is it English law?

Page 32 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

Is it Scottish law? Is it Ireland law? It could be any of those in
different contexts.
It could have been European law. Precisely. I hope it still is, but
that’s looking increasingly unlikely. The other thing is I look at
the possibility that you have – and I won't name any country in
particular, but you have a country in which the rule of law does
not really apply very well, and a directive is made by the dictator
of that country that the ccTLD be redelegated. That doesn’t
contravene Californian law, so therefore, according to this,
ICANN must redelegate simply on receiving instruction from the
government.
This is something we have fought against for 15 years. This is
unacceptable, if that can be construed in that way. So this is not
going to happen. I hope that the language does not permit that
interpretation. Finally, again, interpretation. It gives the
implication that PTI can impose additional requirements when
they are directly and demonstrably related to global security,
stability and resilience of the domain name system. No, it can't.
Only when there's been a PDP from the ccNSO.

MAARTEN SIMON:

I was already afraid for this. The point is that we don’t have the
details here, and I don’t think it's a good idea to discuss the
details now. I invite you, please, go through it and send me

Page 33 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

everything that you think that is not correct currently because
we can open a discussion again if necessary.

LISE FUHR:

I would like to add that there's going to be a public consultation
on exactly the PTI Bylaws and the contract, and I would like to
support Maarten in that it's not written like own laws. It's in a
broader sense. It's more the rules or whatever is applicable to
that specific registry. So I don’t think there is a problem
regarding the law. The last one, I'm a little more uncertain
about, and I think it would be important that we look into it, of
course, and you will get a chance to do so.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible]

LISE FUHR:

When? I actually think it's within a week or two, so it's going to
be out for public comment very soon. Trang is still here, I see, so
I can't remember the date.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Page 34 of 43

[inaudible] certainly [inaudible] as well.

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

LISE FUHR:

Yes. Trang, can you – sorry, Jay, just...

TRANG NGUYEN:

Yes, Lise. The PTI Bylaws is expected to be posted for public
comments either later this week or early next week.

LISE FUHR:

Thank you.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

What’s the duration?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Can you [inaudible] the mics on? Please. I can’t hear you.

TRANG NGUYEN:

I think the question was what's the duration of the public
comment period, and it will be posted for a 30-day public
comment period.

LISE FUHR:

Thank you, Trang, but actually, they can be previewed now. I
don't know if it's the final one, but one can get a sense of how
they look.

Page 35 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

TRANG NGUYEN:

EN

Yes, everything either via the IOTF mailing or the CWG mailing
list. You can see a first draft of the PTI Bylaws, as well as the
areas where [inaudible] had raised some questions to the CWG
on. You can also see the discussed and agreed upon responses
to [inaudible] questions, and essentially, the difference would be
we would just be incorporating the CWG responses to [inaudible]
questions into the next draft, which would then be posted. This
document that Maarten is referring to is a document that was
drafted by [inaudible] as well, working with some members of
the CWG, so we'll be taking a look at that and incorporating that
into the next draft of the Bylaws that we will post for public
comments.

LISE FUHR:

Thank you, Trang, and I'd like to add that ICANN legal and
[inaudible] are working very closely on this, so it's actually two
parties working together on implementing the different
questions. The next consultation will not include the contract,
but we will have a consultation on the contract. Go ahead, Jay.

JAY DALEY:

Thanks. Jay Daley from .nz. My understanding of the answer to
Nigel's two points was that first of all, the Bylaws or the rules
would incorporate initially RFC 1591 of GAC principles. We've
eliminated ICP 1 taking place and being part of it, and when FOI

Page 36 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

is complete, FOI becomes part of it as well. The point there
about not being able to violate its own laws means that it can't
violate FOI, effectively is the interpretation of it.
If I'm wrong, please explain that to me, but I thought that was
the whole point about the timing of FOI, to have that into PTI for
that particular purpose that Nigel is talking about.

LISE FUHR:

To be honest, actually where this is taken from is from the old
contract with NTIA.

JAY DALEY:

Right. The old contract with the ICP 1 GAC and RFC 1591,
probably. So I think, to Nigel's point, I don’t think that it would in
any way allow a dictator to issue something that is then thought
of as in charge of that. And the other one is it clearly says "will
comply with local law." That doesn’t mean that you have to pick
which of your four overlapping laws is the one. To me, it's a
statement of the obvious, that it wouldn’t say you're allowed to
break the law. It's a very fundamental statement along those
lines that it must be lawful in its operation.
So I really don’t see that we have those problems that Nigel has
pointed out there. I think this is consistent and straight forward.
We've just got some work to do about FOI, which is natural,

Page 37 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

because FOI is a big piece of work to make sure that that’s into
the policy sector.

LISE FUHR:

Thank you, Jay, and actually to add to that, the reason why this
was raised by Paul Kane was actually to make it very clear, the
distinction between ccTLDs and gTLDs, and you have certain
situation where it's important to make that distinction. It's not
done in all clauses, but we have those specific issues as ccTLDs
that we wanted to ensure is still being taken care of.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

No other questions? Okay, thank you.

LISE FUHR:

Well, I have 25 minutes to sing you a very long song or whatever.
That’s one more question, thank you.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Yes, but I was waiting until all the questions about the specifics
of all these many acronyms were discussed because my
question is not so much about the post-transition scenario, but
about the pre-transition one. I'm not completely clear about
what's going on right now, and I would appreciate if somebody
could shed some light on it.

Page 38 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

On June 9, the proposal was accepted by NTIA. I wonder, what's
the status now? Is that the final move by the US government that
was needed? Should there be something else, like a presidential
directive or something, or time is just ticking until he current
contract finishes, and barring some move by Senator Cruz now
that he's free from his other project, everything would go
smoothly?

LISE FUHR:

That’s a very good question. Thank you. Actually, as we showed
before, NTIA has endorsed the proposal as such, but this is the
whole proposal with the Accountability proposal, the IANA
transition, and everything has been tied into a nice package and
sent to NTIA. Then, we look at the date, the 12th of August, and
apart from being my birthday, it's also the day of where we have
to show that the implementation is feasible, that it's actually
well on track, the implementation is in line with the proposal. So
that date is important too.
They need to have it on the 12th of August in order to actually
also sign off that yes, you sent us a proposal which we endorsed,
yes you're doing it in the way you said in the proposal, so it's still
in line with everything that’s been endorsed by NTIA. They have
this committee. I forget what the acronyms are for, but I think
it's called COSO, which is looking into both the accountability

Page 39 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

proposal and the IANA transition. There are some green, yellow
and red flags, and some of the IANA Stewardship transition has
some yellow flags because we haven't finalized the PTI Bylaws.
We haven't finalized the contract.
Until all this has been done and sent to NTIA, they cannot fully
endorse the actual proposal because they need to see that it's
been done in a stable, secure and resilient way, and everything
is in order.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

If it wasn’t for the fact that you said we're ahead of time, I
wouldn’t have come back for second helpings, but just to follow
up from a couple of the other questioners and the comments
that were made, I'm not concerned about the intent of the
people who’ve put this together. What I'm concerned with is the
possibility that in the future, with different people involved, that
these words may be construed and interpreted in a different way
to that which they were intended, either intentionally or
unintentionally. It's as simple as that, and until I've actually read
the exact proposed words, we don’t know if there's a concern or
not. I'm just saying that the perception that comes over from
your slide was concerning. Thanks.

Page 40 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

MAARTEN SIMON:

EN

Trying to write legal text simpler is not easy, and usually, in a
good legal text, every word has a meaning, so if you try to make
it shorter, then you always lose details that are important. I hope
they're there, but otherwise, I'll hear from you.

LISE FUHR:

That’s why it's so wonderful that we have the whole community
to review it. We are going to need your help, so guys, just read
and review. Thank you.

STEPHEN DEERHAKE:

Stephen Deerhake, .as, American Samoa. Is there contingency
planning ongoing in the eventuality that the constitutional
questions that are being raised by Senator Cruz and others most
recently overnight comes what I would characterize as "to the
forefront" on the run-up to the proposed transition date, and if
so, can you give us an outline of it? Does Work Stream 2 work
simply come to a halt if something arises that prevents the
transition from happening? Can you give us an overview of that?

LISE FUHR:

I can. We had the same question of the GAC this morning, and
the short answer is no, there is no contingency plan from the
CWG side. I don't know if ICANN has a contingency plan in
relation to this. What I know is that we as CWG is formed to make

Page 41 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

a proposal, formed to actually oversee the implementation of
that proposal. As I see it, we're not doing anything that’s
irreversible at the moment. We're creating the legal offset for
PTI. We're looking into SLEs that would benefit ICANN as such if
it stays as it is.
I don’t see we're doing anything that would create a disaster if
it's not happening, except that it would be very sad to tell the
whole world that you're handing over the stewardship to the
international Internet community and then not doing it, which I,
for the record, would find very sad and bad and terrible. Any
other questions or remarks? Feedback? We're 18 minutes before.
Yes.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Well, it's not the first time today.

LISE FUHR:

I know. It's fine? Thank you for listening and thank you for your
questions.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Thank you very much. So please, mind that next session starts
3:15 and not in this room. This was going to be Hall A. You go up
and then go all the way to Hall A. With GAC, and we're going to

Page 42 of 43

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 4)

EN

discuss PDP just as we did earlier today, and going to talk about
the survey. GAC Working Group on underserved regions came up
with a survey on government relations with ccTLD managers, so
I expect a very interesting discussion. It will be a one-hour
session, and then we reconvene at 5:00 here, same room.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 43 of 43

