ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 1

Transcription ICANN Helsinki
GNSO Next-Gen Registry Directory Services to replace WHOIS Policy
Development Process Working Group
Tuesday, 28 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at
The recordings and transcriptions of the calls are posted on the GNSO Master Calendar
page http://gnso.icann.org/en/group-activities/calendar

Chuck Gomes:

Okay this is the Next Generation Registration Data Services PDP Working
Group Meeting on the 28th of June here in Helsinki.
Welcome to everyone. We want to get started fairly close to on time; probably
about ten minutes late. Thank you for those of you who are on time.
Again, please log into Adobe Connect if you can, and we will be using that for
hands raised. But you can also, you know, raise your card or raise your hand
and we'll call on you that way as well. David is going to let me know if we
have any remote participants.
The first thing we want to do is see if there are any Statement of Interest
updates, and I'll just pause for a few moments to see if anybody has an
update to their Statements of Interest.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 2

While I'm waiting for that, this is a working group session today. The only
difference, really, is that it's open to everyone and everyone may participate.
So whether you're a working group member, a working group observer or a
guest, you are welcome to participate. We would like you to use a mic.
So do we have any roaming mics or do they need to find one at the table?
Man:

(Unintelligible).

Chuck Gomes:

Okay, good. Okay, so just remember to identify yourself for the transcript
case in particular and that will be very much appreciated.
The agenda is on the screen. Let's just go through it. We're going to start off
with some introductions. We've got the - and David is going to handle the
introduction section. Then we're going to look at the work plan and Susan is
going to go over that.
And then we'll get into our real work for today. And just take a look there at
the bulleted items under number three, we're going to talk about Outreach #1,
and we're actually going to - the Leadership Team has prepared some
responses to the four inputs that we've received.
Have we received any more since the four?

Woman:

The Outreach ones? No.

Chuck Gomes:

Okay. So we'd like the working group to go over those today and suggest
edits or see if we can get confirmation to go ahead and finish the Public
Comment Tool on those.
Task 9E then -- Outreach #2 -- this is the deadline for that today. Now again,
like I said in the cross-community session yesterday, we're setting deadlines
to manage our work and to make sure we're making progress. But we will

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 3

rarely have a deadline -- at least in our early stages of our work -- that is in
concrete. We're not going to reject things that come in late, so keep that in
mind.
It's the same thing with our requirements. We will discover requirements later
on that we missed, and that's okay. We're not going to be rigid about this. At
the same time, we want to be somewhat efficient and manage our progress.
Then the third bullet -- Finalize Task 11 -- that's a very important one deciding
how we're going to reach consensus when we're doing our deliberations.
We'll be looking at that document that's been distributed to the working group
and talking quite a bit about that.
And then we might get into Task 12 today; it kind of depends on how the
previous task goes. But we may start a little bit of deliberation there and so
we'll see how it goes.
Any questions or comments about the agenda before I turn it over to David
for Agenda Item 1?
Okay David, you're up.
David Cake:

So we're just going to try and introduce ourselves. If you are a working group
member, you still should be able to come up to the top table. If you're a
working group member in the background or otherwise want to introduce
yourself, that's fine too.
We think we've got a large working group, a lot of the members don't know
each other; may not have met face-to-face. So we're just going to make the
effort to spend a few minutes introducing ourselves. So I think we'll start with
me and head clockwise.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 4

So my name is David Cake. I'm one of the three Vice-Chairs of the working
group. We've got three vice-chairs each from one of the stakeholder groups oh four but three vice- chairs and a chair; one from each of the four
stakeholder groups in the GNSO.
I'm from the Non-Commercial Stakeholder Group and obviously within the
GNSO and primarily - or with NCUC as a constituency. And also I come here
as a representative of Electronic Frontiers Australia.
Fabricio Vayra:

Good morning; Fabricio Vayra, Partner of Perkins Coie, member of the EWG.
No, not EWG; I was a member of the EWG -- member of this group, yes.
Anyway, good morning.

Man:

(Unintelligible).

Alex Deacon:

Hi everyone, my name is Alex Deacon with the Motion Picture Association of
America. I'm a member of the Intellectual Property Constituency in the
GNSO.
I do want to mention that my background is technical and not legal -- as you
may assume -- with focus on security and Internet and infrastructure and
applied cryptography. But it's nice to meet you all.

Victoria Sheckler: I'm Vicki Sheckler with the Recording Industry Association of America and a
member of the IPC.
Michael Palage:

Michael Palage; Pharos Global.

(Stu Arc):

(Stu Arc) from U.K. with no particular affiliations.

Sara Bockey:

Sara Bockey with Go Daddy.

Roger Carney:

Roger Carney with Go Daddy.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 5

Beth Alegretti:

Beth Alegretti with Fox Entertainment Group.

Andrew Harris:

Andrew Harrison; Amazon.

Chris Pelling:

Chris Pelling; Net Earth registrar.

David Cake:

Actually, could we also try and mention which geographic region we're from.
And I know it's obvious to a lot of us here, but it's probably worth
remembering if you are a member of a stakeholder group of not. I know I
mean, obviously, Go Daddy are a registrar and so on, but.

Man:

(Unintelligible); Scandinavia and registrar.

(Emily Barvis):

(Emily Barvis); GNSO Policy Staff, based in Europe.

David Tait:

David Tait; ICANN Staff.

Greg Dibiase:

Greg Dibiase; Endurance International Group and the United States.

Man:

(Unintelligible) with (Unintelligible) of South Africa of the registrars.

James Gavin:

James Gavin; Europe with the Non-Commercial Stakeholder Group.

Man:

(Unintelligible), Electronic (unintelligible) Finland which is in Finland and
Europe, and Non-Commercial Stakeholder Group.

Carlos Raul Gutierrez:

Carlos Gutierrez; Latin America and the Caribbean, GNSO

Councilor.
(Donna Ali):

(Donna Ali); NCUC and Canada.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 6

Ayden Federline: Hello everyone, my name is Ayden Ferdeline. I'm here in my capacity as a
member of the Non-Commercial Stakeholders Group and based in the United
Kingdom. Thanks.
Maxim Alzoba:

Maxim Alzoba (unintelligible), (unintelligible); Registry and Registrar
sometimes.

Michele Neylon:

But only on Tuesdays. Is that it?

Monika Konings: Monika Konings; ICANN Staff, Central America.
Lisa Fifer:

Lisa Fifer; ICANN Staff, North America.

Susan Kawaguchi:
Chuck Gomes:

Susan Kawaguchi with the BC and North America.

Chuck Gomes and I'm from North America also with VeriSign and Chair of
the working group.

Michele Neylon:

Michele Neylon, Registrar (Unintelligible) which is Europe. We're still in
Europe; (Unintelligible) which is a registrar.

David Cake:

To any of the people sitting not at the main table want to introduce
yourselves? You have an opportunity if you wish.

Man:

(Unintelligible).

David Cake:

I know. Are there any other - especially - are any of you not sitting at the main
table working group members? And I guess we don't have anyone on - do we
have any remote participation? Thank you.

Chuck Gomes:

Thank you very much David.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 7

And with regard to working group membership or working group observers, I
just want to make sure everybody understands that there's no deadline when
you have to become a member. So if sometime during the progress of a
group you want to become a working group observer or a working group
member that is a possibility.
And GNSO working groups are open to everyone. The only condition is, is
that the follow the standards of behavior for ICANN and for the GNSO
working groups.
Next, I'd like to turn it over to Susan to take a look at our work plan.
Susan Kawaguchi:

Thanks Chuck. So far, we've had the Outreach #1 that we talked about

yesterday, and we are analyzing the comments that we received, and you
can find that on the working group Wiki as Outreach #1 Public Comment
Review Comment. It could be a comic review tool also Comment Review Tool
-- June 25 anyway. It's a little too early for me obviously.
And then we're right in the middle of the Outreach #2. We've reached out
again for requesting additional possible requirements.
If your stakeholder groups/constituencies are still working on that, obviously
we can still keep accepting any possible requirements. This is sort of a fluid
receipt date, so we can, you know - it would be great if we had them because
then the working group needs to review those. But as they come in, we
appreciate you sending them in.
And then Task 11 -- which is our most important task today I think -- is to
decide how and when the working group will try and reach consensus.
And then if there's any questions on the working group status and plans, we
can take those now. No. Anything to add Chuck?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 8

Sorry, James.
James Gannon:

Thanks Susan. And I know that we have kind of a high level idea of how
we're going to draw it and approach the items and try and work through this,
but do we have a little bit more detail on how that's going to happen yet
because I'm still personally very concerned about the timeline of how that's
going to happen because in my mind -- just looking at what we have and
what we need to get too -- I'm still concerned over how that's going to
happen.

Susan Kawaguchi:
James Gannon:

Sorry, of the Task 11 in particular.

Susan Kawaguchi:
James Gannon:

So the timeline of the working - sorry - timeline of the work in general or?

Oh, Task 11.

Is that something we want to talk about later or do you want to talk about that
now?

Susan Kawaguchi:
Chuck Gomes:

We can talk about that now, can't we?

Well, notice that that's in agenda Item 3, so we'll get to that. Okay and in fact,
the target for that, I'm hoping that we can at least agree on that approach
today in this meeting. Now, if we can't, we can't; we'll deal with it. Okay, but
that's the goal. Okay?

Marika Konings:

Yes, this is Marika. Just for the record, I wanted to note that the work plan
has now also been communicated to the GNSO Council as one of the
requirements in the charter by Stephanie who is the Council Liaison to this
working group.

Beth Alegretti:

Beth Alegretti, hi. Just to go back to the outreach real quick. If I'm part of the
BC, if the BC doesn't have a comment or anything to add on that Outreach,

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 9

do we need to officially submit no comment or, you know, is it fine to do
nothing?
Susan Kawaguchi:
Marika Konings:

Go ahead Marika.

Yes, this is Marika. I think at least from a working group perspective, it's good
to know that nothing is forthcoming, so I mean we just take an email saying,
"Well, we're not planning to submit anything at this stage," because
otherwise, we don't know if something is still maybe in the pipeline. So if it's
easy to do, yes, it's helpful, but it's definitely not an obligation.

Beth Alegretti:

Well lets you and I work on that together because I have an idea.

Chuck Gomes:

This is Chuck again; just jumping in here. Like Marika pointed out, it is helpful
to know. We want to make sure that we're giving all groups an opportunity to
provide input. And it's perfectly understandable that you may not have any on
this.
But just a simple email that would say, "The BC has no comments," or
whatever group it is, that would be appreciated.
Fabricio?

Fabricio Vayra:

So does the - if you don't have any comment and that's been related back to
you, for example, for the IPC it was related back to me on the first outreach
that there was no substantive comment to put back, does it matter whether it
comes officially from them or can I just fill out the form and put it in on their
behalf if they're okay with it?

Chuck Gomes:

Well in the case of Outreach #2 -- this is Chuck -- we actually are doing it
informally. So whoever is the liaison can just communicate it to the group is
fine.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 10

In the case of more formal outputs, it can also be done through the liaison;
that's okay. But the formal outreaches will generally have specific directions
in terms of who to communicate to.
Okay, Chuck again and let's jump into the main part of our agenda. And could
we bring up the Comment View Tool -- post that so that we can go over that
in detail. And we'll take as much time on this as we need.
We'd like your feedback, certainly if you have any concerns - good; that's
better resolution there so that we can see it.
Now this Comment Review Tool is one that the GNSO has been using for a
while for responding to public comments and so we're using the same
template.
And I'm not going to go through and read the comments section. Notice the
first column is a number of the item, but then the second column is the
comment itself -- or at least a condensed version of it. And then it shows who
the comment is from, and there are four groups I believe that we have
received comments from; the SSAC, the Regarding Stakeholder Group, the
GAC and the ALAC.
And you'll see that the comments are organized by the questions there. So
there will be multiple occurrences of the submitters depending on what part of
the comment.
So with the first comment from the SSAC, the green agreement just means
the working group is in agreement with the SSAC in terms of what they're
suggesting with regard to the documents that they proposed. We don't
necessarily need to take any action on this particular case - excuse me; let's
back up. Actions taken, the documents were added to the inventory.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 11

So again, for any visitors that are here, we -- the working group -- went
through and identified dozens of documents that could be input sources for
the working group. And then we reached out and said, "Hey, did we miss
any? Are there some other ones that we should add?" And that's what we
asked for the community.
The SSAC identified some there and then those -- in this case because the
SSAC was the first one to get their comments in quite a while ago -- those
have been added to the inventory. And then, also in this case, because we
received them some time ago, some working group members have extracted
possible requirements from those documents already.
Okay? Any questions on Item #1? Okay.
For the same question that you see up at the top there -- any documents
missing -- the Registries did not have any additional documents to identify, so
that's a simple response.
Number 3 then, the GAC said they were satisfied with the requirements
reviewed. So again - and then we noted their comment. So any questions on
3?
We can scroll down to the next slide. So again, you can see the ALAC didn't
have any so that's a simple one. Let's go to 5. Okay, excuse me. It's not 5; it's
the next question; my mistake.
So this is - the second question then, you know, did you - a lot of groups had
previous input into this process. So this particular question relates to that and
we're just adding them to confirm whether any of their previous input has
changed. And you can see the SSAC response there.
Notice - here's the first example today where we have a proposed response
from the working group, so I'll read that and you can look at it there.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 12

The working group confirms that the initial list of documents identified are
indeed part of the key inputs received from third parties. The working group
has added the additional document to the list in response to the SSAC's
input. And so you can see the action taken which was in the response as
well.
And again, in this case, the working group members have already extracted
possible requirements from that document to add to our long list. Okay?
Any questions on the first item under this request? Okay, then the second
one is the Registries Stakeholder Group comment and this is a fairly long
comment because the Registries actually -- for the purpose of emphasizing -the Registries actually sided some points that they had submitted months ago
-- in fact, back on July 13 2015 -- as you can see. And then the responses
are also fairly lengthy here because the Registry input on this one was
lengthy.
The first point the Registries made -- as you can see there and we'll have to
scroll down - if we can scroll down a little bit and see - I don't know if we can
see both at the same time. Here we go - oops.
Okay, so one of the points the Registries made was that, you know, costs
needed to be analyzed throughout the process and right from the beginning.
Now you can't do too much in terms of analyzing costs until we have more
detail about requirements and policy and so forth.
But some of you will recall that Stephanie from our working group, you know,
has brought this same point up in terms of making sure we look at costs and
possible cost impact. So that will be an ongoing task throughout.
And so you can see the response from -- the proposed response from the
working group -- and we're basically saying that, you know, the cost model is

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 13

going to be part of all three phases. And so we will have - we're in
agreement, I think, with the Registries although we recognize that it will be
easier to estimate cost and possible cost impacts once we get further into our
process.
So take a look. I won't read it since it's a little bit longer, but take a look at that
first paragraph on the cost model there in the right column. See if you have
any suggestions in terms of the response. Is it okay? Do you want to modify
it?
Okay. The Registry comments, again, emphasize coordination with other
Whois efforts going on and they talk about prioritization in Phase 1 of certain
questions, and then expectations of privacy.
The last bullet shown there -- a technical feasibility industry impact and so
forth. So the responses continue on the right. Just take a quick look at that in
the lower half of the screen, the full paragraph that's showing there -- working
group deliberation.
Any questions or comments on that?
And then the proposed response to the Registries comments here, they're
listed in some bullet points to cover the points that they talked. Some of the
other points, an effort to order group and prioritize possible requirements has
just begun.
So just to bring everybody up to date, right now, Susan and Lisa are
spending a huge amount of time starting that task, okay. And then they'll be
coming back to the full working group in the next few weeks with a first step
of triaging the long list of requirements that we have. And the working group
will work on prioritizing those so that we have some sense of what order to do
them identifying the pendent requirements, so Requirement A is dependent

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 14

on Requirement B. We'll obviously need to cover Requirement B first, so that
has begun.
The second bullet there, there's a response that just says a privacy is one of
the first three areas that the working group is going to deliberate on
requirements. Okay, most everybody who is in the working group I think is
pretty aware of that.
And then the third bullet there -- Impact Analysis -- that comes in when we
talk about costs, and one of the related questions out of the Charter 11
questions that we'll be going through. And then that also gets into
benefits/risks -- also another one of the eleven questions.
And then jurisdiction concerns will be particularly addressed when
deliberating on possible privacy requirements and gated access
requirements.
So that's a fairly long response to quite a larger input. Any concerns with
that? Any questions or suggestions for edits?
Lisa, go ahead.
Lisa Fifer:

Thanks Chuck; Lisa Fifer for the record.
The points that are made here on the left by the Registries Stakeholder
Group. They sound a little like possible requirements. Did the stakeholder
group actually submit those as possible requirements as well?

Chuck Gomes:

No; I don't believe that they did. This is Chuck. The Registries did submit
some requirements that were just received yesterday I believe, but I do think
that - I think their new ones are not specific to these.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 15

But that's a good point, so I wonder if maybe we have another action item on
this one. That's a good suggestion. So if we scroll back up to Action Item just scroll up to Page 3 there. Who's controlling this? There we go.
Okay, so there under Action Items, we may want to add -- in addition to
seeing the response below -- an action item that working group members
should be tasked with seeing if there's some possible requirements from the
comments. Okay?
Any other questions or thoughts on this?
Michele Neylon:

(Unintelligible).

Chuck Gomes:

Oh, I've got to look at my Adobe. James, go ahead. Sorry, James.

James Gannon:

No problem; James Gannon. Is this a good point for me to come back to my
timeline description because I think it's relevant to the response to this.

Chuck Gomes:

Go ahead.

James Gannon:

So I just wonder, can we have a little bit of a conversation possibly just for a
minute or two about how we actually hope to -- maybe in a bit more detail -approach locking down these requirements and starting to go into debating
on them and they relevant, they're not relevant. You know, there are so many
people around the table here, we're going to have a serious, you know,
struggle or disagreements over many of them.
And so from my point of view, you know, I do business requirements from a
date basis from work. And I personally just - I don't understand how we're
going to work through it.
I understand the high level concept that's being presented and I would just
love to understand a bit more in detail how that's going to fit into any sort of

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 16

timeline. You know, because if this is being worked with a dedicated time, I
can still see that requirements document taking months to work through.
Chuck Gomes:

Thanks James. And that really leads into other things we're going to cover
today. When we get to the attempt to finalize Task 11 -- which is to decide
how we're going to reach consensus -- we're going to spend a lot of time on
that today -- as Susan said. That's a key objective today.
And that ties in to what Susan and Lisa are doing as they first cut to tackling
the long list of requirements, and then that will lead to prioritization and so
forth.
And that's where we're going to decide, okay, how we're going to tackle all of
these requirements and deliberate on them. So we're actually going to talk
quite a bit about that today.
So if you can hang on a little bit - yes, if you can hang on a little bit in the
agenda, we'll get more to that. But please, follow-up.

James Gannon:

Yes, that's brilliant (unintelligible). And I'm just - maybe we should just put
kind of an asterisk beside some of our comment responses then just until
we've made sure that the working group is happy that this is something we
can move forward on how we're going to knock down these requirements
because we have it in a couple of the responses, I think, about some
concerns over the number of requirements and et cetera, et cetera.

Chuck Gomes:

This is Chuck again. I guess I'm not totally clear what you're suggesting in
terms of putting an asterisk. We're going to go through all of the requirements
and debate them -- pros and cons and try to come up with compromises if we
can; things like that.
What exactly are…

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 17

James Gannon:

I suppose that's my concern. I have serious wonders whether we can actually
do that; I don't know how physically we're going to do that as a group.

Chuck Gomes:

This is Chuck again. We have to do that as a group. And like I mentioned
yesterday in the cross-community session, I hope there's a few that are easy,
but there will be a lot of them that will be hard. And everybody is going to be
able to air their concerns, their suggestions and so forth.
And I hope everybody also will be willing to collaborate with one another. Are
there ways we can deal with Stephanie's concerns and with Fabricio's; I'm
just picking on a couple people that I know pretty well. And, you know, they
will conflict sometimes; we know that, okay.
So yes, you will. And everybody knows I've been trying to hold people back in
terms of starting this before we get there because it's going to take a lot of
time to do this. There may be some requirements that we have to spend a
couple of meetings on.
Now the other issue -- and you'll recall I brought this up in a previous working
group meeting -- is how do we - you know, we've got, right now -- for those
that aren't aware of it -- we have a list of possible requirements that's in
excess of 800. That's intimidating.
If we are to try and do those one by one, some of us would be long gone
before we got through that. But that's part of the triage that's going on. Maybe
we can tackle them in groups or several things. And if we get a chance to
start some deliberation, there's another thing that we can do today that looks
at them in a different way.
But a lot of time is being spent on that. Thanks to Lisa and Susan, they're
taking a first crack at some things, and then it will come back to the working
group and we'll debate it and try and improve it and so forth.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 18

Stephanie.
Stephanie Perrin: Thanks; Stephanie Perrin for the record.
Yesterday in the GNSO meeting, we had a discussion because there will be a
meeting with the GAC at 11:00 to discuss their concerns about the output
from the Privacy/Proxy Working Group.
And I just wanted to put on the table that going through all of this work to
analyze these documents and, you know, just the prospect of arguing with
(Fam) over our particular differences over the next umpteen years, I would
hate to do that and think that the GAC could come in at the end of it and
disqualify this process, and I'm sure everybody feels the same.
You know, it's not just that the GAC's views are usually different than mine on
this matter. I think we all don't want to throw - because quite frankly, if Trump
card is played at the end, we will not take it quietly and say, "Oh that's fine.
All those other concessions that we traded off for that, we'll just forget about
them." That's not going to happen because as you know it's a complex
process involving trust.
So got any thoughts on that? And we hope you're going to hang around for
that.
Chuck Gomes:

No commitments there. For those that don't, I had my 70th birthday a couple
of weeks ago but, you know, I'll try, okay. My wife may have something to say
about that.
But let me turn it - I will respond to…

Stephanie Perrin: She's welcome too, Chuck.
Chuck Gomes:

I'll respond but let me let Michele talk.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 19

Michele Neylon:

Thanks; Michele for the record.
And Stephanie, I agree with you 1000 or 10,000%. As one of the people who
was involved in the PPSAI, to say that I am frustrated by how this is playing
out -- with respect to the GAC and the Public Safety Working Group -- is
possibly the most diplomatic and polite way of expressing it.
If the same kind of thing were to happen with this, well, honestly I don't know.
I just - words would fail me. I wouldn't know how to - I mean this would be
ridiculous because if we can reach consensus within this working group, that
would be a major achievement; that would be historic.
If consensus from any working group is then put at risk due to third parties
who -- at the same amount of time which I would consider to be ample in
order to address their concerns -- were to disrupt that entire thing, I would be
incredibly upset, annoyed, and I would use lots of expletives.
To Chuck -- you dark horse. If we had known about such a momentous
birthday, we could have done something.

Chuck Gomes:

Marika did.

Michele Neylon:

That's because Marika has access to your deepest darkest secrets or
something; I don't know.

Chuck Gomes:

Okay, I'll get you in.

Michele Neylon:

As if you'd know (unintelligible).

Chuck Gomes:

Let's go to Maxim and then Susan.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 20

Maxim Alzoba:

Actually, I think it might be a good idea to approach your relevant GAC
member and (unintelligible) introduce him ideas slowly because they go into
mind all the time. So we - they do not have like surprise in the end. That's my
thinking.

Chuck Gomes:

Thanks Maxim. This is Chuck again before I go to Susan.
It's a very good suggestion. If you know your GAC member and stuff, having
some conversations with them would be a good idea -- and answering there
questions.
As we're talking about the GAC, I want to caution us. Let's be respectful to
governments and the importance of their input. I think we're probably all on
the same page in terms of the concern that Stephanie raised, okay. But let's
do it in a respectful way and we'll be a lot more successful.
And I think all of us understand that, so let me go to Susan.

Susan Kawaguchi:

And actually, I absolutely agree with you. I think reaching out to GAC

representatives or the PPCWG or whatever…
Man:

(Unintelligible).

Susan Kawaguchi:

Thank you; me and acronyms don't work. Any of those members, I think

is helpful to sit down and have discussions which is something I've been
trying to do even on the PPSAI.
So hopefully - I am hopeful that maybe we won't get GAC Advice on the
PPSAI; I know that doesn't really pertain exactly to what we're discussing
today. But I think it would suit us all to really be active with our own GAC and
the Public Safety Working Group and try to get - if they can't come and be the
voice, then try to get some of their points of view understood and convey
those to the working group.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 21

I was a little -- at the GNSO meeting -- I was a little bit surprised at what
appeared to be equal weight between the GAC and the multi-stakeholder
community. And that was, you know. So we need to iron that out with the
Board too, and I think more discussions with the Board would be good on that
topic.
Chuck Gomes:

Thanks. And I'm going to turn it over to Michele to address Sara's question in
the Chat.

Michele Neylon:

Thanks Chuck. Actually, Sara, as you're in the room - this is Michele - do you
want to just put your question on the mic rather than have me weed it out in
an hour shack (sic) as opposed to your accent?

Sara Bockey:

This is Sara Bockey for the record. My question is -- and I'm not sure if this
was raised at some point and I dismissed it -- but it's something I've been
wondering about since this working group started.
And so what that is, is that it seems in order to answer the question is a new
RESOURCE needed? We needed to take into consideration the outcome of
current Whois PDPs such as the consistent labeling and display, RDAP,
translation and transliteration, privacy proxy, et cetera. It would seem that
Whois will be changed when these are implemented.
And so will be taking the outcomes and improvements of these PDPs into
consideration when we go to answer the question is a new RDS needed.
They may not be requirements per se, but documents and items that should
be considered.

Michele Neylon:

Thanks Sara. Chuck, would you like to comment on this?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 22

Chuck Gomes:

Sure. Yes, I think it's a definite yes. In fact, it's part of our charter to take a
look and coordinate with the other working groups and efforts going on in the
community that relate to our work. And there's several of those.
There's the privacy/proxy issue, there's Thick Whois, that one - so the PDP is
done but the implementation is still to happen. So there are quite a few. The
translation/transliteration, that's another PDP that's done as far as the
working group so far; it has yet to be implemented.
So absolutely; we have too. And we don't want to duplicate what those - it
would be wrong for us to go back and redebate the things that a PDP working
group has already made recommendations on. It would not only be a waste
of time, but it would undermine the work that's already been done and
undermine the whole process.
Does that answer your question?

Sara Bockey:

I think so, yes. So we will take all that into consideration before we do our first
report that we're anticipating being done by December?
And so then my question is if some of these haven't been implemented yet
and we don't know what the change will be to Whois, and it might be an
improvement that satisfies a lot of our issues and questions, then how can we
issue the first report that's going to answer the question is an RDS needed if
those haven't been put in place yet?

Chuck Gomes:

Excellent question; this is Chuck again.
In some cases, we'll probably have to put a conditional statement saying, "It's
still ongoing. Here's what we think is going to happen." It will be a case-bycase basis.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 23

But in terms of any final recommendations, it will be dependent on the
finalization of some of that work including implementation -- as you noted.
So let me comment to Stephanie's issue, and I'm going to digress a little bit
away from our charter and talk a little bit more about some personal
perspectives I have with regard to this issue. And they were running through
my mind yesterday during the GNSO meeting when they were talking about
the Red Cross national names and the acronyms and the IGO names and so
forth. And I chatted with James as Chair of the Council just before this
meeting.
And it's not my roll to tell the Board what to do; it's not any of, I guess, our
role. But I think there is something the Board can do, and I hope that the
GNSO Council will communicate this. And it kind of came out in the
discussions in the Council meeting yesterday.
But I think that we need - and I have a fairly simplistic view on this that is the
Board is not a policy development body, nor is the GNSO Council a policy
development body.
The Board is the group that approves policy, but that policy is developed in
the case of our situation -- the GNSO; the same thing for the other SOs. And
the GNSO Council is the manager of the policy development process.
The Board, in my opinion, has three options when they're presented with
consensus policy. Number one, they can approve it, and then, of course, the
obligation is it will be put on registries and registrars for their contracts.
They can reject GAC Advice - excuse me. What I'm saying - I said that wrong
at the beginning. When they get GAC Advice, they have three options;
number one, they can approve it, accept it; number two, they can reject it,
okay, and the bylaws say what they need to do if they reject it; or number
three, they can send it back to the GNSO.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 24

When they - and I don't think they have other options. But my suspicion is
that the GAC because -- and I don't mean this critically -- but I think we've
over the years set this expectation erroneously, I think the GAC expects -because they have the direct relationship with the Board, there advice goes
to the Board -- that I think there's the expectation that if they give advice that
goes against policy, the Board can agree with them and override policy. And I
think that's wrong.
What should happen, again, if they do that and they make a significant
change to policy recommendations, they have just become a policymaking
body. And I don't think the Board believes they're a policymaking body. I think
that's the conundrum that they're in right now.
And I think they need to - and I think it will take some time to do this but I
think they need to communicate that okay, this -- very significantly -- was the
policy that was developed and approved by the GNSO Council, and so it's
got to go back.
Now as many of you know, I was co-chair of the policy and implementation
working group. Now that was not a consensus policy working group, but the
recommendations of that group -- and some of you were involved in that with
me -- were that policy and implementation kind of go together, and that if
there are significant changes to any policy recommendations, it needs to
come back to the GNSO and needs to be dealt with.
Staff can't just change things, and we're very explicit about that. And the
Board approved these recommendations.
Okay, so I think that the expectations of the GAC need to be clarified. And
again, it's not my role to do that; it's not. But I think that's a position the
GNSO Council can take and suggest that the Board make that clear. And

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 25

maybe first of all, it's making sure that the Board is agreement with this way
of looking at it.
And I really think they are. That's why they've been frustrated. But until the
GAC understands that and has the correct expectations, we're going to keep
getting this situation -- including in the one we're working on.
Sorry to take so long, but hope that's a little bit helpful.
Stephanie Perrin: Stephanie Perrin for the record. And I totally agree with you, and I was hoping
that - and I'm a former government person. I certainly don't speak for the
Government of Canada; I don't speak for any government.
But I have been saying since I got here, my goodness, this is a very unusual
government body -- the GAC. And the way they're treating the work
environment seems to be more like they think of themselves as a council of
ministers approving or disapproving of the work that is done here.
And that's not the way I think it ought to be. They ought to be working with us.
And normally, as a former public servant working in these international
organizations, you work and you contribute and you don't act as if you're the
sort of approval body.
And so how this came about is fascinating; worth a dissertation on its rights -no doubt. And possibly some student somewhere is writing one.
But it really deserves some examination because I don't think we're just going
to fix this by having a GNSO liaison to the GAC. We need to explore just
exactly how everybody sees the process and get some - and Work Stream 2
is a good place to do that isn't it? Nobody wants to upset the applecart on the
CCWG stuff by getting into the deep, deep layers of this -- how it's risen.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 26

But it does seem to me that as a multistakeholder model, this is not going to
work because people are not going to be willing to put in five years of work on
something and have it trumped. Thanks.
Chuck Gomes:

Yes, and we've got several people in the queue. We've got James and Alan
and Marika.
And I want to just interject something else first, and that is I was really
pleased yesterday at the presentation of the GAC in our cross-community
session. That is a really good sign. And the GAC is really trying. And it's hard
for them -- as governments -- and the way they approach things to do this.
So let's be a little bit patient. At the same time, let's do everything we can to
ensure that things are done right and that the model that we have for
developing policy isn't compromised.
And let's go to James.

James Gannon:

Thanks Chuck. I suppose it actually builds on what you just said, and
particularly because we have a few extra people in the room as well.
For those of you who have GAC members who are here and attending,
please go and talk to them. And please like tell them what we're doing and,
you know, show them that we're not the big evil GNSO because the more
informed GAC members we have, and if you have a country that is actually
sending people to the GAC and is becoming engaged, please utilize it
because those of us who don't have engaged GAC members are, you know,
jealous of those that do. So if you have that opportunity, please do take it.
And tell them about RDS and tell them about the other things that you're
involved in because the more educated they are on these things, the less
likely we are to get situations where we get contentious GAC Advice coming
out. It's a call to action.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 27

Chuck Gomes:

Thanks James. Chuck again. Alan, go ahead.

Alan Greenberg: Thank you, thank you. It's been a few years since I sat around a GNSO table
and took the microphone to suggest there's other ways of looking at things.
But I think it's important here. It's not just an issue of the GAC has to
understand; they can't trump what the GNSO says.
The GAC does have the right to advise the Board, and the Board may well be
in a position to decide that the GAC has a good point they want to listen too.
Therefore - and Chuck's right. That may well mean something gets sent back
to us.
Since we tend to labor long enough on these things, it's not clear we want
something sent back to us. So we do have an onus to the extent that the
GAC will participate in our process. To not say that they have, you know, veto
rights in our discussions, but that we should be listening because it may well
bounce back to us two years later if we don't.
So I think we have to make the whole system work; not just decide who is
man on top each time or woman on top each time. Thank you.
Chuck Gomes:

Chuck again, thanks Alan. That's well said.
The point is that it just needs to come back. And we have to accept in the
responsibility when it comes back to us - I'm talking about the GNSO - to…

((Crosstalk))
Alan Greenberg: (Unintelligible).
Chuck Gomes:

What's that?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 28

Alan Greenberg: We don't want it to come back; we want to do it right the first time and that
does mean listening and factoring in GAC concerns.
Chuck Gomes:

We're on the same page, okay? Let's go to Marika.

Marika Konings:

Yes, this is Marika and I think it's a point that Jonathan made yesterday as
well during the session that, you know, we've already come a very long way.
And I think both the PDPs that are currently under discussion or where there
are concerns, they actually predate all the new mechanisms that we now
have for early engagement.
I think the RDS PDP is actually the first one, for example, had the quick look
mechanisms where the GAC did respond as part of the preliminary issue
report. They have already provided input as well to Outreach Message 1.
So they are actively engaging and trying to involve themselves in the working
group deliberations -- which as you said, is a really good sign. So I think the
hope is that through that engagement and continuing that, and maybe worth
as well from time to time, to ask them, you know, are you able to keep that up
because, indeed, for them it is a challenge. They're trying to find mechanisms
by which they can provide timely input.
But, you know, for the GAC, they need all of them to agree to make it GAC
input.
And I think we've tried to communicate as well through the work that has
been done in the consultation groups is that it doesn't always need to be
formal GAC Advice. It can be, as well, input from individual governments
because that will still give an idea of what government perspectives may be.
So those can be factored in similarly to all the positions of different
stakeholders here around the table.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 29

So I'm at least hopeful that through those new mechanisms and that new
sense of realization as well from the GAC side, that it's really important to
have their views heard at a very early stage. I'm hoping we won't be in a
similar situation at the end of this process.
Chuck Gomes:

Thanks Marika, and Chuck again and Susan is next. But let me add the GAC
has come back to us on our informal Outreach #2 and said, "Hey, we're going
to be late but we're doing it."
See, there are good things happening so let's not leave with the impression
that the GAC isn't changing and growing; they are and we're seeing the
benefits of that already.
Susan.

Susan Kawaguchi:

So one thing that comes to mind to me is that, you know, it would be to

our advantage to make, you know, just continue that relationship with the
GAC. And maybe we do something similar to the GNSO GAC liaison, but
from this team where we do develop a short, you know, really bullet, onepager. But maybe work with the PPSWG because they're part of the GAC,
right.
But I think that's where our work is going to be most relevant to them -- to
those members. And then they can deliver to that -- to the GAC -- that maybe
we just make that special accommodation; have one or two people, or
whoever it works out to be, point person so when they do - if they can't stay,
don't have the resources to be in all the calls and the meetings, then have
someone they can reach out to and say, "Where are you on this point," and
really get some clarity for them.
And so - but sort of make it as easy as possible for them to stay engaged. It
might be worth the working group's efforts to do that.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 30

Chuck Gomes:

Thanks Susan; Chuck again. And before I go to Michele, note that the GAC we do have a person who is serving as a GAC liaison right now.

Susan Kawaguchi:
Chuck Gomes:

That's all right; there's an awful lot going on.

Susan Kawaguchi:
Chuck Gomes:

Oh, I'm sorry.

(Unintelligible).

Now - and he's willing to continue doing that if the GAC will support that. So
again, good progress.
Michele, it's your turn.

Michele Neylon:

Thanks Chuck; Michele for the record.
I'd love to be able to agree 100% with Alan, but I actually can't because one
of the problems with this framing of this GAC GNSO interaction is that there's
an assumption that there's a consensus between the two parties -- or at least
that's the way I understood what you were saying.
There's been the issue that we're currently facing around the Proxy and
Privacy is that it wasn't that we didn't listen to, hear or consider what they
were saying; it's that we didn't agree with it. And we did consider it, we did
look at it, and it was very much a case of let's for a second (unintelligible), oh
no a third, oh no, it's a fourth bite of the apple.
And then we end up with this ridiculous situation where -- how many months
after that PDP finished -- nothing has happened and the entire thing has
stalled. I mean I think we're now 12 months plus or I don't know if somebody
is keeping track of it.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 31

And that kind of interaction is not healthy. I mean we can consider, we can
discuss, but if we've ultimately rejected and we've reached consensus within
a working group, I don't know what we're meant to do with the GAC if they
keep coming back saying, "No, no, no; we still want you to do it." This is the
bit I'm struggling with.
Chuck Gomes:

Let me jump in here and I think I'm going to cut this one off here. I think the
points have been well made; they're all good points. Let's plan on working
constructively with the GAC, and again, let's recognize that they're making
really good progress, and it's demonstrated in this working group.
So let's not continue this discussion but let's be constructive in our attitudes
and optimistic that this is going to be a working group where we get pretty
good participation from the GAC.
And keep in mind. We're going to do lots of outreaches and keep them
smaller in volume or smaller in content to that it's easier to respond. And
hopefully, that will - so far, that's working with the GAC. It looks good on our
first two outreaches, so that's very good.
So we've got the one action then on the Registry comment -- the long
Registry comment here. We're going to add the action item; we have that.
Is there anything else on the working group response to the Registries
comment on this particular Registry comment? Okay, let's scroll down then to
the next item in the table, and scroll a little bit to the left.
So we've got number three, and good timing; it's the input from the GAC. And
we're suggesting that we agree with the GAC. You can read the comment
there from -- the suggested comment from the working group.
Any concerns about that? Suggested edits? Okay, and note that the
documents have been added to the list of inputs we received.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 32

And notice there's a second action item. We need to task - so this will be an
action item coming out of this meeting I presume that would task a working
group member or members with identifying possible requirements from that
additional document. So that's an action item.
So I don't know if there are any volunteers in the meeting today -- somebody
that would like to take that task -- take the lead on that and come back to the
working group. If there is, please identify yourself. If not, let's reach out to the
full working group list and make sure we get that task assigned.
Okay, yes. Vicki?
Vicki:

(Unintelligible).

Lisa Fifer:

So Vicki there. I believe there are four additional documents. Are you
volunteering for all four? Thank you.

Chuck Gomes:

Fantastic, thank you very much. Okay, we appreciate that.
All right, now I guess that raises in the question, we may want to modify the
action item a little bit. The working group has identified one of its members
who will do that task, okay. Thank you very much; appreciate that.
All right, let's go to the next item -- number four here from the ALAC. Now we
won't let Alan talk on this one will we? I'm kidding of course.
So in this particular case - in fact, Alan, if you'd like, since you're here, you
want to talk to the comments? Okay, all right. So you can look at the
comments there on number four.
And the ALAC suggestion here, in my opinion, is very good. There are some
documents that we really need to take seriously. And interestingly enough, I

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 33

think we have on all of there -- and will even more going forward -- take a
look at - so the action item is to ensure that all the documents identified as
critical by the ALAC are examined for possible requirements. And I think -- in
large amount if not all -- we've got that spin done; we may find more.
Take a look at the proposed response. Any questions or comments on that?
Alan, go ahead.
Alan Greenberg: I guess I will make a brief comment.
The main focus was not to say, "Make sure to look at those." There's not
much chance you're not going to. It was a pragmatic statement saying there's
an awful lot of documents and a huge number of pages to read. And if
somebody isn't going to read all of them, make sure these are on the list you
do read.
Chuck Gomes:

Thanks for clarifying that Alan; appreciate it. This is Chuck. So any questions
or comments on that one? Okay, let's go to the next one.
Oh, go ahead Lisa.

Lisa Fifer:

I would just note, I did believe that most of the documents were identified
either have volunteers or have already been covered. But I don't think that all
follow the statement of EWG members have been covered yet and that we
don't have volunteers to cover all of them yet.
And also, I would note that we're still waiting for the possible requirements
from the new European data protection work. That is assigned but it's still not
sending on it (sic).

Chuck Gomes:

So - this is Chuck. Can you identify - let's try and get some volunteers for the
ones that are missing. Can you identify which ones we need volunteers for?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 34

Sure, take a minute. Now pay attention because I'm looking for some
volunteers just like Vicky so graciously volunteered on the GAC documents.
Lisa Fifer:

I'm not going to find it on that list. What I'll do is I'll type it in Chat.

Chuck Gomes:

Okay, thank you. Okay, so that will be put in the Chat, and if there are
volunteers here today. If there are not, then let's put it out to the working
group.
Now I want to interject just a little another logistics matter. Keep in mind -those of you in the room that aren't working group members -- you're
welcome to participate, just let us know. So if you have a question or a
comment or suggestion, you're welcome to do so. We just want you to go to a
mic.
It looks like there's one mic available over here and we have a loose mic that
can be used as well, okay.
All right, let's see, we've got that covered. Let's go to the next one. These
three are all pretty straightforward, so I don't think we need to spend any time
on those. Go ahead and scroll down.
The next one where we need you to review it is, again, comments from the
ALAC. And the action items are really related to the second paragraph as you
can see. And I'll let you take a look at those and the comment itself and see if
there's any input on the proposed response.
Okay, anybody need more time? All right, let's go ahead and move forward.
And here the question is, "Is there any other information," this was kind of an
open-ended question -- anything else you would like to suggest. And the
SSAC did submit some things there. And again, a fairly lengthy response so

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995690
Page 35

I'll pause a little bit longer to let you take a look at that. So bear with the
silence a little bit while we give people the chance to look at those.

END

