ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 1

Transcription ICANN Helsinki
GNSO-New gTLDSubsequent Procedures PDP Working Group Part 2
Wednesday, 29 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at

The recordings and transcriptions of the calls are posted on the GNSO Master Calendar
page http://gnso.icann.org/en/group-activities/calendar

Jeff Neuman:

Please take your seats so we can get this started. Okay. Could we get the
recording started? I’m looking over but I - thank you. Okay the recording has
started. If everyone could sit down please.
We are starting the second session of the Policy Development Process
Working Group on subsequent procedures for new GTLDs which I’ve actually
started abbreviating as Supro.

Woman:

As Supro. Yes.

Jeff Neuman:

Supro. I’m getting these - it is awkward. It sounds like Cipro.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 2

Woman:

Well that’s a drug.

Jeff Neuman:

Okay. So I’m going to turn it over. The agenda for this one is to finish up in
the first few minutes on some of the overarching questions and then to go
into the work tracks, talk about some administrative matters on that and then
really to make sure we understand which items are in which track and
whether that’s the appropriate area for them or not. Avri, take it away.

Avri Doria:

Thank you. Avri speaking. So if we can move off of - oh no, is this when we
were at the rounds? Yes we were.
So we’ve been talking about rounds. Again the assumption I’m still getting
from people -- and this one is less clear to me where we’re heading than
some of the others -- in that there’s certainly a prejudice against rounds,
especially the aspect of rounds that means after a rounds you do a review
then you wait a long time and then you talk about doing another round.
That seems to irritate a lot of people. There’s another trend. It’s one that I’ve
liked to speak of. It would really be nice if we could get to a steady state of
there being applications but that seems to have problems.
So we’ve been talking more in terms of is there some kind of windowing that
can be done that doesn’t have the negative aspects of a round but also
doesn’t have some of the problems we see in going to steady state and is a
window any different than a round. You know, is it just a semantic difference?
So this one is still - I - with the first two I kind of had an assumption, yes we’re
going to do GTLDs, yes there are types but we got to get specific.
In terms of rounds I’d like to hear - I’d like to spend no more than, you know,
five to ten minutes on any of these because we really do have to get to the
others. But does anyone have a clear view?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 3

Yes? You had just raised your hand, right Jeff? Remember to give your name
and all that stuff.
Jon Nevett:

Jon Nevett. It - I would suggest a hybrid approach where you do both, a
round and then a steady state where you have a 60-day window where we
could accept applications and then if there’s any pent up demand for the over the past X number of months or years or whatever it is and then we
have a contention resolution for that. But then move to a steady state day 61.
So you have 60 days of taking applications and then day 61 you start
accepting applications first come, first serve. So there shouldn’t be any rush
to the courthouse which is the worry that we had last time and will probably
have again this time.
So you deal with that in the first 60 days and then again right after that you
move to a steady state like - just like the registrar accreditation process
happens now. Thanks.

Avri Doria:

Thank you. I’ve got Jeff. Do I have other hands and - okay, thanks Jon.

Jeff Neuman:

So I’ve been actually thinking about this question, again not as chair, just as
personal thought. I don’t think we could ever go truly to a first come, first
serve. I think with the different - with objection procedures and evaluations
and all the other time to take public comments and things, I don’t ever see a
purely first come, first serve.
What I do see is a hybrid but a little bit differently in the sense of you maybe
say, again, I’ll work on a 12-month calendar year, perhaps months. You
know, January through March let’s say you accept applications. A 90-day
window I think is what the past one was.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 4

Quarter two, which would be - sorry April through June, that’s when you take
in comments and - or you have a period for objections and all that fun stuff.
And then potentially for the first year you then might want to look at tweaking
some things, not a review period but if there’s tweaks.
But then starting up on year two you do a constant three months accepting
applications, three months of comments and disputes or objections and
things and then start up again another 90-day window. So you’re having
basically two windows a year.
I just don’t - because you’re talking about a unique resource, I don’t see it
quite as simple as just a registrar accreditation because you’re not just
accrediting the entity as you do with the registrar. You’re actually giving away
a public resource in a sense. So - but I do see it as a steady state type of
activity.
Avri Doria:

Jonathan. Please.

Jonathan Zuck:

Jonathan Zuck for the record. I - this conversation’s come up a little bit in the
CCT review as well and came up yesterday in your session when Jordyn
suggested we just get started tomorrow with a steady state. And that got
some applause in the room but wasn’t widely accepted.
But I wonder if there’s also a difference between, you know, our situation right
now and what the ongoing situation might be. In other words, are they
necessarily the same?
And I guess where that seems most acute is with the brands. In other words,
is there a segmentation issue that might allow an accelerated effort on the
part of this group to make a brand round available in the near term because
there’s fewer issues at play?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 5

And that could be done as a round but it’s not necessarily indicative of what
the future would hold which might be more like the program that you have laid
out Jeff. That’s just one of the things that comes to the mind.
I mean other people have brought up communities which to me feels more
problematic as needing their own round.
And then some people have talked about underserved communities but I
think that - the effort associated with serving them and getting to that market
is going to be substantial enough that it’s not immediate.
So brands feels like the exception to the rule in some ways. I thought I’d raise
it.
Avri Doria:

Thanks. So you’ve added complexity to it in terms of mixing the topics of
typing and rounds and going on a round as being…

Jonathan Zuck:

You’re welcome.

Avri Doria:

Okay thank you. Thank you. Okay we got Brett and then we got Jordyn.

Brett Fausett:

Yes, I didn’t know if you’re just looking for new ideas or trying to get a sense
of the room but to the extent you’re getting a sense of the room -- sorry, Brett
Fausett for the record -- I’d like to support what Jon said about having a
round and then a steady state where we move to first come, first serve.
And think about all the problems that first come, first serve is going to solve
when we get there. There are huge inefficiencies when ten people apply for
the same string. You know, 90% of that effort was wasted for all the time and
effort that went into putting the application together.
So the sooner we can get to first come, first serve, all that contention around
who gets the string that two people want takes care of itself.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 6

Avri Doria:

Thank you. Jordyn?

Jordyn Buchanan: Yes thanks. Yes just to -- this is Jordyn Buchanan with Google -- just to build
on what Brett said, it’s not just the inefficiency from the perspective of the
applicant -- although that certainly exists -- but there’s - if you just look at the
guidebook -- Stephanie knows this better than me -- I think something like a
third of the guidebook is dedicated to de-contention process.
And if you look at the number of like reconsideration requests and the amount
of time to like staff and the board would have to spend minding the program,
almost all of that relates to this contention process, the de-contention
process.
And so it is - it would make this process so much more straightforward I think.
It would increase the predictability for applicants which I think is one of the
principles embodied in the existing policy and hopefully that will carry through
to any existing policy changes and, you know, just vastly reduce the amount
of sort of fighting that goes on over these names.
Now Jeff is right obviously that we can’t just say it’s first come, first serve and
if you apply, you just get it no matter what. Like obviously there’s - these are
important resources and we need to make sure that they’re allocated wisely.
But certainly you could allow someone to apply at any moment and then have
a window of time after the application was lodged in which objections could
be filed. It would just be that you would have the right to that name assuming
that you were to make it fully through the evaluation process and the
objection process without running into a stumbling block.
Avri Doria:

Thank you. I don’t want to get into it now but I’ll be interested to find out how
we understand who got there first. I have (Dick) and then I have Jeff.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 7

(Dick Fresenovsky):

(Dick Fresenovsky) from .Berlin. I would echo Jonathan and adding this

complexity not only to - with brands but also with geo top-level domain names
which didn’t create any problems in that round. And having something in front
of the round and decreasing the pressure of that round having brands and
geos and maybe another tier cup category which is not in conflict with generic
terms could help.
Avri Doria:

Thank you. Jeff and then I think maybe one or two more. But I think also that
we’ve got a fairly open issue. What - we’ll have to see what comments we get
and then go back to it. But Jeff.

Jeff Neuman:

Yes thanks. And I appreciate - again as a personal comment appreciate the
inefficiencies in looking at it from the applicants’ side, point of view, but I think
there’s other points of view you need to look at the process from as well.
And, you know, when you’re dealing with a public resource or a resource,
handing it out first come, first serve does not always result in the… While it’s
certainly a fair way to allocate, it doesn’t always result in the right party
getting the resource.
It doesn’t always result in - I mean look what we saw in dotcom and others.
You know, the first person to get there isn’t always - it could be for
speculation or other purposes.
o I fully understand the notion of making it easy for applicants but also I think
we need to look at other sides and other communities.
I also think that for - from other stakeholders that I’ve heard, if you establish a
predictable process -- there will be applications during this period -- it would
make it easier for others who - to follow what’s going on and to be able to
have a predictable time period in which they would file objections and other
things.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 8

Avri Doria:

Thank you. Okay, I’ll give you the last word and then we’ll move on or is there
any other hands that I’m missing? Susan, you had a hand?

Jordyn Buchanan: I was trying to respond to Jeff.
Avri Doria:

And then there was Susan, okay. And then Susan will have the last word for
this pass at the topic.

Jordyn Buchanan: So Jeff I agree with you that first come, first serve does not result in optimal
allocation but neither does any round basis that - as long as we do a
sequence of rounds, some rounds are earlier than others and the people that
get into the early rounds have - are going to be the people that get the
names, not the people that apply later in the process.
And once there’s some process to revoke a TLD from an existing operator
and allocate to someone who we think would be better at the job -- which I
don’t think anyone’s contemplating -- you always have that same problem of
someone else got there first even if someone more qualified would come
along later on.
First come, first serve I don’t think really has a material effect on that
especially in a model like you’re talking about with three-months rounds twice
a year. If you’re three months too late, then you’ve still missed it - missed the
boat just as you would’ve if they - if you were doing a first come, first serve.
Avri Doria:

Jordyn, as a quick aside, I have noticed that whenever somebody brings up
an - a dadum certum, somebody does eventually contemplate it.

Susan Payne:

Yes Susan Payne for the record. Just a quick one really. I guess we shouldn’t
have any session here without mentioning this lottery. You know, if we do a
first come, first serve and it opens on the 1st of January 2018 or 2019 or
whenever, 10,000 applicants could be trying to get their application in before
everyone else. I mean, it’s unrealistic.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 9

Avri Doria:

That is sort of what I was alluding to by how do we define first.
Okay. Can we move on to the next one please, next slide? Predictability. The
first principle was predictability. And we’ve heard a fair amount about how
predictable it was.
But then again the notion that we didn’t talk about when we were doing the
previous set of policies was flexibility for dealing with issues that either hadn’t
been dealt with, hadn’t been discussed or the fact that the world changes and
there are new issues that hadn’t been foreseen.
So this time we’re starting to look at the balance between predictability and
flexibility and how we sort of make policy, what kind of statements we make
about finding that balance.
And suggestions have come up about, you know, there’s - the - for a certain
amount of time but over time things get a little less flexible until finally things
are frozen or other suggestions.
So at this point I’d like to take a couple people that may want to comment on
this issue but like all the issues, we’re not going to solve it here now and we
still do need to see the comments. But does anybody? I don’t have any hands
on screen. Does anybody want to talk about the sort of conundrum of the
relationship of things being both totally predictable and sufficiently flexible?
Nobody’s got a solution for that one. Thank you. Edmon.

Edmon Chung:

Edmon here. Well it’s predictably unpredictable, right? That’s the whole
nature of the beast. But I think to go down this path we really need to think
about what we want predictable.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 10

And there’s always going to be uncertainties in certain times because there’s
going to be appeals, there’s going to be… Because these are important
resources, as long as they continue to be important resources, there will be
disputes, there will be appeals, the times would vary.
So I think what is - what needs to be predictable is the principles applied for
every, you know, action taken from - I guess from the staff and from the
board. And that seems to be more useful to make sure that we’re holding on
to certain principles and those continue to be predictable as we go through
the rounds or the process or however we process the TLDs.
Avri Doria:

Thank you. Would anyone else like to comment? Seems like a decent
approach to see how it works out and whether we can define those principles.
Okay. I think we’ll work on that one more when we get the comments out,
okay. Please. Oh you put your hand up. I didn’t see that. Please, Paul
McGrady.

Paul McGrady:

Just that I don’t think we need to go all the way and say, “Well, you know,
let’s see what happens,” right?
We got to - if we know something is likely to happen or we bake in a
comment period for example or this or that, I think it would be very helpful to
clarify dates, certain times when things are due so that we don’t end up with
people coming in late on things in this process that change the outcomes.
And so I think we’ve got to -- to the extent that we can make it predictable,
right, without harming flexibility -- and I think we need to put some guideposts
around flexibility, not flexibility for its own sake but flexibility for some really,
really important reason -- safety, security whatever -- that we didn’t anticipate
before.
I suppose that’s fine but we also should not fail to rise to the challenge to
make it as predictable as possible so that everybody can read it, understand

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 11

it. And if you - for example, maybe I missed my application window. Should it
be so flexible that I can turn mine in three days late? Probably not, right?
And so we can - let’s try to be as predictable as we can. And when we’re
flexible, let’s be flexible for principles.
Avri Doria:

Jeff.

Jeff Neuman:

Yes I agree with that then. And I agree there are certain things that will need
to be rigid and like certain time frames and other things.
I also think we need to avoid the situation where we change - some people
say it’s like changing the goalpost after someone’s already applied.
So what we had happen here is we had a base contract and, yes, little things
could change here and there to have some sort of flexibility.
But I think in this case, we had a base contract and then after everybody
applied, one of Fadi Chehade’s first initiatives was to ensure that ICANN can
unilaterally change the contract. So I mean that is a massive material change.
So we can set - we can have flexibility but also set guidelines and say that
there cannot be any material changes that - or changes that have a material
impact on the process going forward or on those that have submitted
applications in the past. I mean, there can be guidelines but also flexibility.

Avri Doria:

So we’re saying that that kind of flexibility -- the Fadi flexibility of changing a
contract -- is something that we would look at undoing in this process?

Jeff Neuman:

It would be something more akin to the process we have now to change a
contract which is you have to go through the stakeholder. There are ways to
amend a contract right now.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 12

And just because you have new entities coming in that don’t already have a
contract, you still follow that process as if it were someone who was under an
existing contract.
Avri Doria:

Last words on this one before I move on to the next one?
As I say, all of these - we still got to get the comments though I am going to
ask at the end of this -- and I’ll telegraph that to the staff folks -- to see
whether they think that they’ve started to get enough to start building our first
set of discussion points so that when we get the comments, we’ve got
something to compare them against as opposed to a blank sheet. But I’ll ask
them that question later. I’m just letting them know now that I plan to ask
them that question.
Okay. Can I go to the next one? Community Engagement in New GTLD
Process. So are there circumstances when the application should be frozen
while unforeseen policy issues are considered and resolved?
If so, should there be a threshold or standard that must be reached before
considering freezing an application window?
If the board is faced with questions that cannot be addressed in a policy
recommendation they were sent, must the board bring the issue back to the
GNSO and PDP process, the expedited PDP and GNSO guidance process?
We do have processes now that we didn’t have when this first - when this last
round was put together. So, you know, some of the conditions that existed
then for there being no way or no known way of changing a policy now are
different. There is Implementation Review Teams, etcetera.
Should a standard be established to discriminate between issues that must
be solved during an open application window and those that can be
postponed and such?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 13

So comments on this? I don’t have an idea of even a guess of where we’re at
on this one yet. I couldn’t posit a guess on where we stand on this one yet as
a group. So I’m wondering, does anybody else have a guess as to where we
stand on these particular questions?
Okay Paul McGrady. Oh I see your hand was up again. I keep forgetting to
look at the hand thingy. Please.
Paul McGrady:

Sorry. I apologize if I’m talking too much. But I would say that this past week
(Namie) wanted to rethink 5A, the question itself, and add: Are there
circumstances in which the application window should be frozen while
unforeseen or operational issues are considered and resolved?
For example wild fluctuations in currency, right? What if we set an application
window with a currency denominator, everybody pays their fees and then that
currency tanks? And then fulfilling that round would bankrupt ICANN, right,
because the dollars or pounds or euros or whatever currency is used, right,
dramatically loses its value.
And so I would say that I know we’ve only asked the policy question to the
community but maybe we should think ourselves about operational issues
that might also lead to freezing a round.

Avri Doria:

Thank you. Any other hands or comments on this one? I think it’s rather
frightening that the currency would tank and people would have to pay more
on their application. I could just see that. Yes, Susan and then Edmon.

Susan Payne:

I think it’s just a comment on (unintelligible) as well. I mean, I think maybe
yes, maybe there are circumstances where you should be freezing it while
some unforeseen issues are considered and resolved.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 14

But if so, I think that consideration and resolution needs to happen with some
kind of a time scale because we can see, you know, in other places around
this building that some, you know, some topics are being supposedly
considered and there’s no actual process for working on them happening at
all.
So I think, you know, if we were to go down that route, I think we need to be
considering how you could manage that process and ensure that there is a
resolution.
Avri Doria:

Thank you. Edmon, please.

Edmon Chung:

Yes it’s Edmon here. So is this just the submission of the application period
or are we talking about the evaluation period as well?
If it’s the evaluation period, then it’s definitely much more complicated. I
mean, there has been calls from ALAC, from GAC to FRUHEEF, certain
subsets as well. When we talk about freezing an application window, it could
be a subset of a - of what has been applied for as well.
So I don’t have any answers to it but definitely this goes - this ties into the
predictability part where goalposts are, you know, moved all sorts of ways.
And so I think the question perhaps is, yes, so under what circumstances
could this be evoked?
And to say that, to stay - actually to stay silent on the issue is probably
bringing more uncertainty into the process. And, you know, let’s take this and
say something about, you know, these type of situations.

Avri Doria:

So this is something you would apply your notion of there are principles that
would be applied to figure out what to do. As you equated it to flexibility so I’m
assuming that it would have a similar treatment.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 15

Anyone else want to comment on this one before we move on? Okay, thank
you.
Can we go to six please. Limiting Applications. This one has a lot of write-up
but basically this one is limiting in two different dimensions.
One is limiting the number -- if we do a traditional round -- the number that
could be applied for within a round. Last time it was not bounded or it was
bounded per period.
Or whether there’s a limit to the number that any individual applicant could
apply for since there were certainly a lot of conservations about that at the
time of the last application.
But then of course there’s questions of how would one limit it, how would one
enforce it and such as that.
So as opposed to my reading all of this, I’ll sort of throw the floor open and
see if we’ve got initial views, comments. Yes please (Brett).
Brett Fausett:

I’d appreciate some background on why this question is even asked. I don’t
think there’s any purpose in limiting applications but clearly someone raised
it. So what’s the background here?

Jeff Neuman:

Didn’t you chair the group in which this question was raised? The background
is, I mean, I’m - I shouldn’t…

Brett Fausett:

Given my - the issue spotting thing we did, any issue anyone raised went into
this process without analysis.

Jeff Neuman:

Yes.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 16

Brett Fausett:

If you had an issue, it went on the board. So people didn’t have to justify it or
explain it. Now they do.

Jeff Neuman:

Correct. So the reason it’s in our purview or our scope is because it was
raised during that discussion group.
But I will say my comment was going to be that when we discussed this issue
a few weeks back when we were looking at some of these topics, it did not
seem that anyone on the calls or in the e-mails were - even talked about
limiting.
It seemed like the nature of the - or the -- what do you call it -- the tone of the
group or whatever it was was leaning towards not imposing any limits subject
to if there are any technical limits on putting a certain number into the root if
that comes out again but not on limiting the number of applications.
But I would also add that this isn’t necessarily only a round issue. It could be
a first come, first serve issue if within a certain time period, you know, within,
you know, five days they get 10,000 applications. In theory, if you have limits,
the limits could apply.
But that said, it seemed like the tone of the group was not to go down the
path of limiting.

Avri Doria:

Please.

Freida Tallon:

This has been in relation to…

Avri Doria:

Name please.

Freida Tallon:

Sorry. Freida Tallon for the record. Could the limits have been in relation to
the root zone delegation?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 17

Jeff Neuman:

So when this issue came up, it was not in terms of how many to delegate. It
was in terms of how many could apply.
I think initially there were some comments when - I remember at the time
when people saw that Donuts for example had applied for 308. There were
some comments that were raised by individuals in the community that they
thought that that was too many from one organization. That kind of died down
and that was only raised at the beginning.
But again like I said, during our discussions on this topic, it did not seem that
people were leaning towards limits.

Avri Doria:

I have Edmon and then…

Edmon Chung:

Yes I don’t think limiting numbers makes any sense. But the root study is
interesting. I think, you know, that - I don’t know whether that’s one of those
five boxes that was identified.
But that certainly should be redone, you know, given the… Okay so given
what the now - what they experience now, that could be redone. And, you
know, we might be looking at a bigger number per year -- at least that’s my
feeling -- or it might go down. I don’t know why it might go down. But anyway.

Jeff Neuman:

Yes thanks Edmon. Actually that study is being done and they are almost I
think all the way through it. They had some preliminary findings but that study
should be done fairly soon I would think. But they are publishing their - the
results of that.

(Enn Unashaf):

(Enn Unashaf) from CORE. Limiting numbers is - in it - a fact at some point
when the staff and the resources are overwhelmed with the number of
applications that came in. So it limits itself.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 18

And here of course we might actually apply some traffic management, you
know, smarter maybe than typically happens -- which is red lights -- you
know, as it happens in many cities.
And in many cities there’s also something like a congestion charge
depending on the time of the day at which you want to get into the city. So we
might use a mechanism by - you know, if there is a clogged queue, too many
people in the queue, just for the processing, then we say, “Look if you take
this subsequent round there’s going to be rebates, be cheaper.”
So this might be smarter than a hard limit or other, you know, lotteries or
other kind of ways. It was also a comment that was made by somebody else,
let people choose and maybe nudge a little bit to avoid the congestion.
Avri Doria:

Thank you. I don’t have any names for that so I think we’ll leave that one for
now. Again we’ll come back to it once we’ve gotten the comments from the
community comment. Did we have another slide left in this section of odds
and ends.

Man:

(Unintelligible).

Avri Doria:

Open Questions. So we asked if there were further overarching issues. If
there are, I don’t know if anyone here has any but hopefully they’ll come
through in the comments. And I think I’d suggest that we wait for the
comments to go into what other overarching issues there might be.
And then are there any additional steps we have to take to better enable
community engagement. Again, unless someone has a burning contribution
on that one at the moment, I’d say let’s wait until we get the comments on
that.
So I think that that brings us the - I guess there’ll be comments from some of
the cross-communities that come on that.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 19

I’d like to - and so now I’m going to turn to staff support and sort of ask
whether there’s been enough of an impression to start building an early, very
rough draft of what sort of has been talked about as being the first
impression. I won’t even call it a consensus yet but the first, you know,
general impression of where we’re going on some of these things so that
when we get the comments, we have something to compare against and to
change.
Julie Hedlund:

This Julie Hedlund, (unintelligible). We also had a comment that was put into
the track if that’s all right. I’ll read that first.
This is a comment from (Michael Fleming). He says, “I think it’s very difficult
to limit the number of applications a single applicant can make. An example
to what a few companies did the 2012 round - did in the 2012 round is to
create child companies for each applied-for TLD. In this sense, one would
seek to limit the number of applications. Would one limit the number of
applications to the parent company?

Avri Doria:

Yes, thank you.

Steve Chan:

Thanks Avri. This is Steve Chan from staff. So I guess I’m trying to get a little
clarity on what you’re asking. Are you looking for perhaps an outcome that
would be reached per subject or just a summary of findings to date or
whether or not it’s going to result in policy recommendations or? I guess a
little more clarity would be - what you’re looking for.

Avri Doria:

Basically we have a set of overarching issues that we will need to answer.
And some of those answers may be no issue here. Some of those answers
may be we need to do more work and come up with some fundamental
principles for how to answer them.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 20

And I’m just wondering whether there’s been enough discussion in - today to
start getting that collection of what the first set of answers as opposed to just
waiting for the comments to take us there.
Steve Chan:

Thanks for the clarity Avri. This is Steve Chan again from staff. And I think the
answer would be it varies for each of the subjects. For some as you’ve
pointed out, it’s more clear than others whether or not there’s going to be
additional new detail to these is clearer than whether or not the mechanism
will be to accept applications is around. So I think we’ll probably take this
back.
And I think for the most part we can probably accomplish what you’re saying
and then maybe tweak as additional comments come on - in from the
communities. But in general I think what you’re asking is doable at this point.

Avri Doria:

Thank you. And certainly I’m willing to, you know, help insofar as we can help
and come back with questions. But thanks. Okay. So that’s this part.
And now are you…

Man:

The next slide.

Avri Doria:

The next slide. Oh, okay thanks.

Man:

You’re welcome.

Avri Doria:

That one we did. Right. So now we’re catching up to the second one. We
could skip that one. We’ve talked about that one. It was just to remind us of…
Oh no, now we’re at track one, yes.

Jeff Neuman:

So before we do that, I did want to bring up a discussion that’s something that
we might have to consider. So there is ongoing work right now from the - and
it was actually the first one is that - country and territory names.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 21

And it’s something that we’re going to have to - we may at some point have to
get the recommendations from that group and then do something with those,
just like we’ll have to with the other review teams.
And I had a meeting with the co-chairs of that group whatever day that was, a
couple days ago, Steve was there, and basically it seems like the way that
they’re coming out is that a lot of their issues, there will be no clear
recommendations, that they’ve basically…
This is a group - the Cross-Community Working Group is a group of GNSO or members of the GNSO and well as members of the CCNSO. It’s not
comprised of I don’t believe ALAC and GAC members. Oh they are in there,
okay.
So the meeting I had with them was -- I’ll get to Susan in a sec…
Susan Payne:

I just wanted to clarify.

Jeff Neuman:

Oh, okay, clarify. Sorry.

Susan Payne:

Yes just - I mean, it is open to all but for a long period of time it had I think
only one GAC member notionally involved. There are now about three or so
GAC members. There’s a few people from the ALAC, a couple, two or three,
a lot of CCNSO and the CGNSO.

Jeff Neuman:

Okay so then what their - what they all believe, the co-chairs believe, will be
the outcomes of that group is that they may have a recommendation with
respect to -- and they’re working only at the top level just to clarify again -what they are likely - what’s likely to happen is that they may come out with a
recommendation for two characters at the top level but have a definite split in
the view - in views between the CCTLDs and the - or CCSNO and the GNSO
on how to treat three letters at the top level.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 22

So it is very - so it is likely that we may get -- not that I want to redo the work - but we are going to have to do something with that. We can’t just ignore it
and we would have to find some way of incorporating their recommendations
or lack thereof into our work.
So I just wanted to point that out as another outcome of this week and
something to think about. And we’ll have to inject that into the appropriate
work track which I think is the one that deals with... Probably work track two
which deals with the reserve names I think is where that might fit in.
So I - on that note, what I would like to do for the rest of the time period here - and also we likely have to do this on the next call that we have as well -- is
to talk about the process going forward of this group which includes breaking
out into different work tracks -- as we talked about at the very, very beginning
-- each work track having a specified set of topics, minimizing to the greatest
extent the overlap of subject matters.
And so what we have here are I think four or five work tracks at this point. I
can’t remember if we combined two of them.
Steve Chan:

(Unintelligible) for a second?

Jeff Neuman:

Oh yes. Go ahead, please.

Steve Chan:

This is Steve from staff. So there are five work tracks now. Why it's
complicated I guess is because there were five originally. Four and five got
combined and then we added a fifth possible work track for discussion during
the session. And Jeff will speak about it a little bit later. But so for clarity there
are five with complications.

Jeff Neuman:

Glad our clarity has complications.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 23

Steve Chan:

Yes.

Jeff Neuman:

So what we did essentially is tried to take all of the issues that were in the
discussion group - that came out of the discussion group and that were in the
issue - final issue report and ultimately the charter and put them into discrete
work tracks again with as minimizing to the greatest extent any overlap.
And what we'd like to do is to have - I don't know if we'll call them rappoteurs
or leaders or whatever we're going to call it. Avri, you've got a (unintelligible).

Avri Doria:

Yes. I basically have come to the conclusion that borrowing the CCWG
methodology of sign up lists for volunteers and rappoteurs is an excellent way
to proceed. It's a methodology that collects people and finds people that want
to take responsibility. I love it.

Jeff Neuman:

Well sure. Yes. So yes, we want sign up lists for each of these. I was just
referring to we call them a rappoteur, a leader or whatever we want to call
them.
Each work track then will have hopefully a good amount of volunteers to work
on the items, will select its own leader, rappoteur and meet on its own
timeframes whenever that group can.
And we envision the full group only meeting - needing to meet every couple
weeks for the most part. With the exception of after the public comments are
received for the overarching issues, we might have to meet a little more often
to kind of resolve all of that.
So we think that this is a good way forward. It's also consistent with what we
talked about at the beginning. We did have a number of people that wanted
to volunteer for leading these efforts. And I think this is a good opportunity for
those same people or anybody new to come forward and work on these
items.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 24

So what I'd like to do for the rest of the time is to go through the different work
tracks and the different items within each work track and also then talk about
whether any of these should be moved around of whether we're missing any
and if we're missing anywhere they would appropriately fit in.
As we talked about in the last session, part of this could be going through the
existing guidebook with - on these topics and then using that as a baseline.
But I think we'll leave that to each group to figure out where they want to start
as a base but also keeping in mind that we do not want to reinvent the wheel
and start all over.
So that said, the first work track I think is one of the ones that like the
overarching issues are - have the most - aren't the most heavily bound. But
what we have in here is our process questions, support questions and
outreach questions.
Keeping in mind that outreach and/or support for - from developing countries
- for applicants from developing countries is also work that's ongoing with the
CCTRT.
So topics we have here are looking at things like applicant guidebooks. Is that
actually the best way to implement this program? And also should we have is there a way to take everything that's in one guidebook and break it down
into separate sections; one that would be just for the registry - the front end
registry operators. That's all they had to pay attention to.
A separate section that's for registry service providers, a separate one for
(escrow) providers so that maybe that makes it more manageable; maybe
not; maybe that complicates things too much.
Things like clarity of the application process. How do we, you know, how can
the application process avoid developing processes on an as needed basis?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 25

So the clarifying question process was on that I think was very difficult for
applicants.
It was also very difficult for the evaluators because I don't think they
understood what necessarily they were looking for. And I don't think the
criteria in the guidebook necessarily provided the appropriate amount of
guidance for them to do the evaluations.
And then there were issues of well if we send out clarifying questions to a
back end operator, we have to send them clarifying questions to every single
application for which that back end operator supported.
Things like application processing. We talked about the overarching
questions. If we come up with a solution as to how we want to do that
whether it's (around) first come first serve then this work track would be the
one to then operationalize that if there are any policy questions with respect
to that.
Accreditation program. So one thing I've heard - mostly heard support for,
although at the GDD Summit there were some comments that were not
necessarily in full support of accrediting back end providers, was
accreditation programs for those back end providers.
If that is the case and from a policy perspective we want to do that, this track
then would - could kick it out to a technical committee to look at the
implementation issues and so. So this - that accreditation program is in this
work track.
Systems. This is a question of - and something we need to really look at the
ICANN self-evaluation or the self-evaluation of the implementation review that
they did but on the systems. I think they called it (CAS) was the initial one,
the application system. And then there's the portal and then there's the
centralized zone data file service. All of that are in this work track.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 26

Application fees are also in this work track that - not to determine the actual
cost of what we think the fee should be but the policy behind how do we set
the cost. And then, as I said, support for applicants from developing
countries.
I want to go on to like the second work track because this one's a harder one
to figure out if there's anything missing without knowing what's in the other
work tracks.
Work Track 2 is called the legal regulatory track. This one has everything in it
from the base registry agreement to reserved names and the mechanism for
releasing reserved names; (picks), which is also something that the CCTRT
is looking at.
So this group will take the findings on safeguards and (picks) from CCTRT. It
will look at registrant protections that are built into the - (if) open to the
registry agreement, contractual compliance; difficult issue, registry, registrar
separation or integration. I guess there are two sides of the same coin.
Looking at registrar non-discrimination. The - I can't remember TLD rollout
what that was - what that referred to. I'll have to go back to the…
Man:

(Unintelligible).

Jeff Neuman:

Oh. Okay. So it's how long someone has to actually go live to get delegated,
what that actually means. The second level rights protection - it should be
RPMs. I don't know why it's Cs.
Again, that is actually really for the most part incorporating the findings and
the recommendations of the Rights Protection Mechanism PDP Working
Group. It could also look at some of the implementation issues.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 27

So during their session for example, a couple of days ago it was brought up
that, you know, who's going to look at the registry and registrar
implementation issues.
And, you know, even if the policy - we all find that the policy behind the
clearinghouse isn't - let's say didn't need any changes, did the
implementation of those from a registry/registrar perspective meet the policy
objectives?
So having a centralized Trademark Clearinghouse, have only one of those
clearinghouses, did that achieve its objective? So that's something that will
be in this group.
IGO/INGO protections. That's also being worked on by other groups so it's
basically incorporating those findings. I missed the global public interest GAC
advice safeguards, how that plays into the process.
And the final issue on here that we're - during the brainstorm was the closed
generic issues. That was one that was after the fact. So you had registries
applying for what some considered were generic terms that were ultimately
decided had to - could not be closed. That if it meant the definition in Spec 11
that it was a generic type word, then that had to be opened up.
Well that was not from a policy development process that that came about.
That was from an ICANN Board decision based on comments. Well we have
the opportunity now to do the appropriate policy development. And we can if
we choose revisit that issue and provide other advice to the Board either to
maintain what they started or to make changes to that. So that I think is an
important issue. Paul, you have a question.
Paul McGrady:

Just a comment that -- Paul McGrady -- that that's an example of flexibility
that I think was not based upon a safety or security principle. It was in fact I

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 28

think driven by somebody somewhere who had an agenda perhaps
economic, perhaps political. I don't know.
But that's the kind of thing that I'm glad we're going to address this and let's
brainstorm around that and also other things that maybe we should be able to
predict in the next round so that we're not surprising people because that was
a surprise and it wasn't pleasant.
Jeff Neuman:

Just to clarify, which part was the surprise that people applied for closed
generics or the reaction?

Paul McGrady:

That people applied for closed generics using an applicant guidebook that did
not prohibit closed generics and then on a surprise basis that they were
prohibited. Yes.

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks Paul. Any other comments? (Jordyn).

Jordyn Buchanan: Yes. Jordyn Buchananwith Google. I'm going to try to do this in a way that I
don't sound like a broken record. So I totally agree with what Paul just said. I
think it was surprising and I think it was a pretty good example of a strange
version of flexibility being used.
But I also certainly, you know, we've expressed that I certainly agree that,
you know, really - we really don't agree with the concerns around closed
generics. Having said that, I think it's a really excellent example of something
you don't need to fix before you can allow how (unintelligible) more TLDs
because we have status quo in place for the moment and then work through
this issue and say okay, right now we haven't worked it out.
It's still not allowed. And people can go ahead and apply. You know they're
not allowed right now. And then later on if we work on that we think they're
okay, then that's cool and we'll change the policy at that point. But we don't

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 29

need to get to it as a threshold matter in order to proceed before allocating
any TLDs.
So I think somehow as you're going through these issues it's really important
to triage them into ones that out to be sort of blockers versus ones that you
can get to eventually.
Jeff Neuman:

Thanks Jordyn. I have Avri and then Susan.

Avri Doria:

Yes. Quickly on - and this is a personal point of view. I join people having
been totally shocked that it because an issue because I had always
presumed that, you know, it was totally a thing that people would be doing. If
they wanted to they would. And so it was very shocking that it became an
issue.
I'm not sure that I agree that that's one that can be allowed to go on because
if someone truly wants one, which some of us think from the (rgen) point that
should have been allowed, they can't. And if they apply for anything now,
they have to get it as an open.
And so it actually causes a gap in the ability of someone to apply for what
they want as a closed generic when they're not allowed. So I'm not sure that I
agree with your - that one - I tend to see it as one that really needs to be
solved.

Jordyn Buchanan: I mean you're basically saying - if that's the mindset you take on, you're
basically saying until everyone can have all the TLDs they want, no one can
have any TLDs. Because you're saying there's this class of things that we
haven't worked through and some people might want them and therefore no
one can have any TLDs.
And there's always going to be some class of thing that we haven't worked
out. And it's just going to lead to endless delay. And I would certainly say if

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 30

we really care about like the developing world and communities getting
access to their TLDs, there's no good reason why we should care whether
some big company like Google is allowed to have some generic term as a
closed TLD or not.
And I just think it's incredibly damaging to the opportunities of the program to
hold it up behind some of these sort of (edge cases), which is a relatively
small number of applications for.
Jeff Neuman:

Thanks Jordyn and all good discussions to have inside this work track.
Susan.

Susan Payne:

Yes. I guess this is a discussion for (unintelligible). Susan Payne for the
record. Completely agree. I don't think it was prohibited in the applicant
guidebook so I completely agree with Jordyn and Paul on that. I strongly
disagree with what Jordyn's saying about this is when you can park.
I think as far as I can recall that we've actually got a direction from the Board
to address this. And I haven't been tracking whether they've all given up and
opened up but there was some applicants who are hold outs who wanted to
be closed generics and one of their options was to have to go on hold until
the next round.
So I just don't think we can go oh well, tough guys, park it. We'll go with this
some point when we've got more time.

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks Susan. Anyone else on this? (John).

(John):

Just quickly. I absolutely agree with Susan on that. You know, it wasn't only
the applicant of those TLDs that were held up, it was the applicant - other
applicants that applied for the same TLDs that were held up when that was
being worked through. So just as an issue of expediency we should deal with
it now and not wait.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 31

Jeff Neuman:

Okay. Any other comments on this one? Are there any items that are of a
legal regulatory nature that you can conceive being included in this one? Or
actually, before I ask that question, let me go through the other tracks and
then perhaps there's additional items that we can then move around and - so
that you see them all.
For Work Track 3 even though there's only a few bullet points, they are
actually fairly large. Large items. So the first item was freed versus - freedom
of expression versus GAC advice, community processes and reserved
names. So I'm trying to remember because (I had) a short form for what was
in the issue report. Do you remember everything behind all three of those?
I'm looking at Steve Chan. I guess I should stop looking at Steve is what he
said. So we can go into more actual - what we'll do is one of the action items
we should take away is actually provide more background on these bullet
points when we break down these tracks.

Avri Doria:

Yes. The first one had a lot to do with the sensitive name issue that came up
in the cross community discussion yesterday. So - and such. So those were
the whole basket of issues of names that were community names, names
that were reserved because they were sensitive names, et cetera.

Jeff Neuman:

And also in this is the fact that right now communities were only used as a
prioritization mechanism. But if you were at the discussions yesterday as
well, Mark Carvell from the U.K. - the U.K. GAC representative had brought
up other aspects of looking at communities, which didn't just involve
prioritization but it involved, you know, are there certain terms that should be
reserved for a community and other rules that would apply to that.
Not just we use it as a prioritization mechanism. And if no one applies for it,
we don't even look at the community factors, which is the way it was now.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 32

Avri Doria:

well and we also did have the community objections to the use of a
community name. So we did look at it somewhat that any community was
allowed to object to its name being used in a generic…

Man:

(Right).

Avri Doria:

…TLD. So it wasn't that it was totally ignored. It wasn't necessarily reserved
but they could object. And I don't know if any managed to knock down a thing
for it but they certainly could be. Oh yes, okay. Sorry.

Jeff Neuman:

Sorry (John). A few of yours were knocked down. So that's the first item. Do
you want to comment on that (John) or…

(John):

Yes. Just on the reserved names. I think you got to be more explicit of you're talking top-level reserved names here, right? So in the last one you
talked about IGO/NGO names and that's more on the second level protection
whereas you didn't talk about other geographic terms. You might want to add
that.
So you're looking at Spec 5 in the last work stream and you're looking at what
names are reserved on top level and this work stream it sounds like.

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks. Yes. That's a good way - better way to describe it. Yes. Also in this
one to the extent it's not first come first serve and to the extent that we - I'm
sorry. I skipped a couple things.
String similarity evaluations. So this was both - was it - the standard was it
confusingly similar to an existing string and now there's going to be a lot more
existing strings than there were in the round for 2012 looking prior to that? Or
was it similar to another application? You know, was that process fair,
effective, predictable, efficient?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 33

I think that there are a lot of comments on this. This also includes things like
the plural versus singular issue. That was never truly resolved from a policy
perspective. The Board did make certain - the Board relied on certain
determinations that were made.
And there were certainly groups that were not exactly happy with how those
came out. But there were others that were satisfied. So I think that's
something that needs to be worked on and that's in this track.
Objections. So this is - involved all the different types of objections that there
were. There were legal rights objections. There was also - well that's the next
item. The independent objector. Community based objections. And I'm
probably missing a few that were in the guidebook as well. But those – the
public morality and order, whatever, it ended up being called – those types of
objections.
So again, we need to review the rules around those, the standing – standing
became an issue in some of the disputes, whether the parties – the right
parties had standing. How much they cost. I know that a lot of people were
surprised at the fees they had to pay especially with community-based
objections. And in some of those they ran into the hundreds of thousands of
dollars. So is there a better way to do it that maybe wouldn’t cost that much?
Appeals, so in the past round in 2012 there were no appeal mechanisms –
appeals mechanisms built in. Should that continue? Or should we have
different types of appeals? Are the existing accountability or to the new
accountability measures enough or should we have something else built in?
The role of the independent objectors, so we had an independent objector
that was paid for by ICANN, file I think it was around 20 objections, and
maybe succeeded in one or two, a few of them. We also had ALAC
objections where there was one ALAC objection that was filed that was not

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 34

successful. Should that continue? If not, should it be replaced with something
else?
Avri Doria:

We could have also had GAC objections but I don’t think they filed any but I
think they could have if I remember correctly.

Jeff Neuman:

Well there were, there was – yeah, there was GAC advice with respect to a
couple of them. And then there’s the community applications, community
priority evaluations. That we can go on forever to talk about. Kristina.

Kristina Rosette: A couple things that I don’t see on here, and I’m not sure if they belong in
here. I guess one belongs here and then maybe one is in Work Track 2.
Perhaps in connection with objections, I know that there are a lot of questions
raised about the training providing to panelists, which brings me to the
broader point, which I think perhaps the ones in Work Track 2 and that is the
extent to which it – we think it’s appropriate to give guidance to ICANN in the
selection of the providers.
I know that there was a lot of questions raised particularly in IRPs and
requests for reconsideration about the process that was used for selecting
the providers. You know, to what extent there may have been conflicts of
interest inherent in the provider selection. That type of – and how those are
addressed. So again, that might be better for Work Track 2 because I think
it’s broader than just objections. But it does seem like something that we
would want to take a look at.
Jeff Neuman:

Thanks, Kristina. And I would add you said guidance on the selection of
providers and maybe also the instructions that are given to providers on how
to resolve in this case disputes, objections, etcetera. I think that’s a good add.
And I would initially park that in this work track when we revise these charts.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 35

Anything else for this one? Okay, Work Track 4 is the one that was I guess
combined – that was 4 and 5 if we – if you look back a few months ago. Oh
I’m sorry, (Werner), sorry about that. I just see you now.
(Werner):

I just wanted to add about the accountability mechanism, that those are
accountability mechanisms for ICANN that were used essentially as litigation
– they should have been between the parties. DotAfrica is one of the cases in
point. And the delegation was stopped, you know, other cases as well, not
because it would have been a reason specifically, the party that had won the
proceedings could not proceed to delegation because of an accountability
mechanism.
So I think we should link those mechanisms to the other subject that was
never addressed and should be somewhere here, which is what about
redelegating a delegated TLD, including possibly, because an earlier
process, an earlier piece of litigation would actually come to conclusion
shouldn’t have been allocated in the way it was.
But it could also be because the community was affected by the party that
operates the TLDs and the community has been disenfranchised and should
be able to get redress from ICANN. This is something we have not addressed
in this 2012 round but it should have been at some point, it will have to be
because as it happened in ccTLDs, it might be a good idea to put in
provisions for that in the new allocations of gTLDs.

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks, (Werner). Any other comments? Okay, for Work Track 4, this one is
IDNs and technical and operational – or operations, it’s cut off there. This one
includes obviously, IDNs in universal acceptance is in here. Here, this group
is not going to have to recreate the wheel. There are other PDPs in other
working groups that are looking at IDN issues. There is a universal
acceptance steering group, I think is what UASG stands for, that are working
on the technical solutions for a universal acceptance. So there is other work
that this work track can rely upon.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 36

Security and stability issues, were the proper questions asked in the – this is
referring to the questions that were asked of applicants. Were the proper
questions asked to minimize the risk to DNS and ensure that applicants will
be able to meet their obligations in the Registry Agreement?
This refers to, like I said, the questions in the technical and operational
sections of the – I think it was an appendix to Chapter 2 of the Guidebook. So
there are a number of technical questions that were asked but were these
actually the appropriate questions? Are there other questions that should
have been asked to the registries?
Should there be nonscored questions? This refers to the infamous Question
18. If so, how should they be presented? Should they have actually been
evaluated in some capacity? I guess when it was initially – when applicants
initially responded to Question 18 I don’t think any of them envisioned
Question 18 being used for anything other than for third parties to submit
public comments but actually Question 18 was used for issues like the closed
generic issue and other (unintelligible).
The use of that information be used in the evaluation? Should those actually
be incorporated into a Registry Agreement? Right now anything an applicant
said in Question 18 they’re not held to any of that. Should they be held to all
of it, some of it? If so, how?
Were the appropriate – proper criteria established to avoid technical
instability? I guess that’s sort of similar to the – a couple bullets above.
Applicant reviews, technical, operational and financial, were the financial and
technical criteria designed properly to allow applicants to demonstrate their
capabilities while allowing evaluators to validate their capabilities?
So here you had, for those that went through the process, there were a lot of
questions that if you asked applicants now they just kind of made up

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 37

numbers. There was no basis by which they put those numbers into the
applications, including, you know, how many applications they would have,
how much they’d be paying for each application, how much money they
would – if they were offering, domains for sale, how much they would bring in
so all that were kind of made up at the time but we do have data – some data
now that we can use to perhaps much more narrowly tailor those questions.
And then here we also have name collision. So what measures may be
needed to manage risks for the 2012 and – round beyond their two-year
anniversary, is an issue for here as well as any other gTLDs. So this is the
track that would look at the name collision issue, wouldn’t start from scratch.
There is a report out there on it. And so what do we do with the findings of
that report?
And then the last track is actually not yet a track really, it’s just are there
subjects that do not require policy development but we could just kick off into
some implementation guidance. So the extent that we say in Track 1 that
accreditation programs are a good idea, perhaps if the answer is yes then we
kick it to this Work Track 5 and they work on implementing that.
So are there any subjects that we’ve seen in – or that are not included in one
of these tracks? Are there any subjects that should be moved around
between tracks? I have Kristina first.
Kristina Rosette: Kristina Rosette, Amazon registry. I’m not really quite sure whether they
belong in 5 or somewhere else, but the three that I have thought of are the
role of public comment in the application process because it wasn’t very clear
and I think it wasn’t clear not only to people who operate within the
community but to people external to it in terms of how they could comment,
what would happen with the comments, you know, just kind of that whole
universe.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 38

A second area would be the application change process which I found really
obtuse and difficult to follow. And I think there does need to be additional
clarity on that.
And then the last one, which I actually think should go in this proposed Work
Track 5, is that if the COI requirement is going to be maintained I think there
– the whole letter of credit, I think was such a debacle. The amount of time
that people spent trying to get letters of credit from their banks that ICANN
considered to be acceptable, I mean, when you consider what the dollar
value was of those letters of credit, I mean, just the amount of effort was just
ridiculous.
Jeff Neuman:

Thanks, Kristina, I think those are three good areas that we did not mention
so it’s possible that it was in the issue report or the charter, we just didn't put
it on the slides. If not, we will capture those areas and suggest a place that
we think they fit in. Unless you want to suggest any places. But and then I'll
let Kristina finish and then I’ll go to Edmon.

Kristina Rosette:

I don’t have any strong feelings one way or the other. I mean, it seems
that, you know, the letter of credit issue could go in 4 or 5 depending upon
how you wanted to look at it. The public comment and the application change
process, again, no strong feelings on those two.

Jeff Neuman:

Sorry, I was just writing. Edmon.

Edmon Chung:

Edmon here. I thought the COI was included in 4 because it talks about the
financial evaluation so I thought so but it probably didn’t mean it but that
might be a natural place to put it.
One thing about the implementation guidance, we spent a lot of time on the
Policy and Implementation Working Group and created a report that was
given to the Board. Has it been adopted? It has.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 39

And then doesn’t that framework satisfy what we want to do in terms of
implementation guidance or do we need something, you know, additional to
that? I guess is the question.
Jeff Neuman:

So I’ll let Avri address that and then I’ll go to Donna.

Avri Doria:

I think, for the most part, that’s after we’ve done the policy, so that’s basically
you’ve got a policy and you’ve sent it forward. I think in this case we’re
looking about whether, as there was in the previous one, there’s a bunch of
implementation guidance that you want to give as part of the PDP
recommendations. So I think they’re sort of temporally different. One comes
with the recommendations and one is once they’ve been approved and going
forward.

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks, Avri. I have Donna.

Donna Austin:

Thanks, Jeff. Donna Austin. So, Kristina, the letter of credit thing was another
issue that was discussed by staff in that efficiency – I can’t remember the
name of the report but the report they did. I think the change request process
was also discussed. And I think, you know, staff have the same issue with the
letter of credit that most of the applicants had so maybe there’s some
guidance in that too. So it’s – if we do that review of that report then this is
one of the issues that will probably fall out if it.

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks, Donna. And what I had recommended, and again I’m taking
comments, it was just a suggestion, was that each of – rather than having
everybody review – I mean, everyone should read that report, I think it’s
actually well done and it’s valuable. But I think each of the work tracks then
should find the appropriate areas within that report and analyze those or use
that to help you analyze your individual work tracks.
We have 10 minutes. Does anybody else have comments?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 40

Christa Taylor:

Christa Taylor. I think we might want to consider moving the rollout in Work
Track 2 in the application processing in Work Track 1 together because if we
decide that we – they’re going to be either on a round or a continuous roll out
one could have implications on the other. So tying the two together might
make a lot more sense.

Jeff Neuman:

Sorry, I was just making sure that Steve was capturing all this. Yes, thank
you. Okay. Is there – okay.

((Crosstalk))
Jeff Neuman:

Okay thanks. So is there anybody else with any other items? Okay so what
we will then do is we will put in some of the revisions, make sure we’ll also try
to put in some clarifications as to what some of these subjects actually were
because it’s abbreviated here. And then what I’d like to do is start – is start
opening up just expressions of interest or just to get people to sign up for the
different areas.
And then once we, you know, look at the groups, hopefully we have a good
breakout in each group, look at any groups that need other help and look at
the breakout and distribution and then try to have people in those – within
those groups volunteer for a leadership role in there. And then they’ll decide, I
think, how often the subgroup meetings should be in order to get their work
done and help develop work plans within those individual tracks to make sure
that we progress in a timely manner.
I don’t know if anyone – Avri, you want to…

Avri Doria:

Yeah, so all of that and also though we have, for example, set a sort of block
sample schedule for all of these, but we would want to ask the groups to then
look at the work before them and sort of figure out. The other thing I want to
point out is, wow, there may be a strong desire to participate in many of
these, try and divide it among yourselves if there’s many of you in a company

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 41

because otherwise scheduling becomes totally impossible, especially if we
add it to the scheduling, everybody else is already in in other groups, so try to
spread the wealth.
And the last thing is these groups will only be making recommendations to
the full PDP working group so it’s not like if you’re not in the group you’ve lost
all chance to comment on it, it will all come back to the group so I just wanted
to get those three things said.
Jeff Neuman:

Thanks, Avri. And one thing we could also do if – because I know that there
are a lot of people that like to pay attention and at least see what every other
group is doing, we could look at a notion of creating observers for these
groups just to be on the mailing list. But have a differentiation between those
that are going to actively participate and those that just want to be included
on the emails.

Avri Doria:

Yeah, that’s part of the whole thing of stealing wholesale from CCWG in
terms of how they're doing stuff. Because it really looks like it’s working on a
massive project and a way of doing things. It seems like it’s a working
scheme and I love stealing process.

Jeff Neuman:

Any questions?

((Crosstalk))
Jeff Neuman:

We skipped the Question 5? The proposed question so did we – I think we
already asked them.

((Crosstalk))
Jeff Neuman:

So are there any we missed in here? So I think that once we break out into
the work tracks, to the extent that that was raised like Christa raised a point of
one may be dependent on another, they're may be things within work tracks

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/8:30 am CT
Confirmation # 8995672
Page 42

or between work tracks that maybe dependent on each other and so we’ll
obviously want to make sure that the work track leaders are communicating
with each other on any of those dependencies to the extent that those exist.
And let me look at the last one. Is there any value in attempting to determine
which topics are most important to resolve, assign a level of importance? I
think that’s – we can do once we break into the work tracks. So as far as the
next meeting, I think it’s not going to be this next – what are we Mondays –
not this next Monday, you have that week off, but we will try to meet on the
following Monday, which I believe is the 11th of July? So you have a week off
to enjoy or two weeks off – almost two weeks. And thank you for coming and
participating.
Avri Doria:

Yeah, thank you. Thank you.

END

