ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 1

Transcription ICANN Helsinki
Non For-Profit Operational Concerns Constituency (NPOC)
Wednesday, 29 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at:
The recordings and transcriptions of the calls are posted on the GNSO Master Calendar
page http://gnso.icann.org/en/group-activities/calendar

Rudi Vansnick:

Good morning, everybody. This is the NPOC meeting at ICANN 56 Helsinki.
Welcome to this meeting. We will have one hour and 15 minutes for this
meeting. And the agenda is on the screen. For those who are on remote if
you have any questions just raise them in the chat room so that Maryam can
handle your requests.
As regularly we will do first the roll call, go around the table and present
yourself so that we know who is in the room and who is eventually connected
remotely.
I’m Rudi Vansnick, the Chair of today.

Joan Kerr:

Joan Kerr, Membership Chair.

Carlos Gutierrez: Carlos Gutierrez.
Tapani Tarvainen: Tapani Tarvainen, NCSG Chair.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 2

Klaus Stoll:

Klaus Stoll.

Agustina Callegri: Agustina Callegri
Sam Lanfranco:

Sam Lanfranco.

Maryam Bakoshi: Maryam Bakoshi, Secretariat.
Rudi Vansnick:

Okay, thank you very much. We have a remote participant, Maryam? No?
Okay so let’s move on. We regularly welcome new members. And if I’m not
wrong we have only one member that joined and was approved this month.
Do you have the identity of the person?

Maryam Bakoshi: Yes, it’s One World Platform, (Valentina).
((Crosstalk))
Maryam Bakoshi: Yes, is official representative.
Rudi Vansnick:

Okay so with that I would like to move on as we don’t have that much time in
our agenda today. Report from the NPOC Chair. I will give a quick overview
of what we did in the last three, four months from the last meeting we had in
Dublin until now.
Most of the activities were focused on working in the working groups and I
think everybody knows that there has been a lot of energy spent in the IANA
transition in the cross community working groups. There are new working
groups that have been started up and there will be quite a lot of new PDPs
that will be kicked off.
We had a final phase of the GNSO review working party where we finalized
all the recommendations that are now on the table of the board to decide on
which will be implemented and which one will not be implemented.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 3

Furthermore, we – as I’m the chair of the SCI, the Standing Committee on
Improvement of Implementation, we had two issues on the table in the
beginning of the year, and one is a quite important and critical one, it’s the
changes needed in the GNSO procedures for the election of the chair and
vice chair, as we ended up last year in not having a chair elected. And there
was some issues with the vice chair. So the SCI has been handling that issue
very carefully.
I split it up – the group in two sub teams so that we could work in parallel in
order to enable us to finalize the job before the next general assembly where
the elections for chair and vice chair will happen again. So we finished the
work as we need to have full consensus, everybody has to approve the SCI,
which happened.
And the next step is that we will publish the recommendations and the
proposals for changes in the procedures after the Helsinki meeting for public
comment. And we will be in time for implementation for the next GNSO
general assembly. That I think is a good job we did.
Apart that one, and I will then move over to other colleagues for the ExComm
to give also their view and report on what we did. In preparation for elections
and after having cleaned up the database we provided a platform for the
members to – we created a profile for them so that they could enter all their
information, their vision, the work they are doing, the topics that they want us
to focus on.
So that we can promote what they do also. It’s a kind of way of getting them
more interested in NPOC. It’s a first step that will be extended once we have
collected more information.
And I got a message even yesterday still somebody added some information
to their profile so it’s still growing, it’s still moving. And I think I can hand over

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 4

the mic now to Joan who is our Membership Committee Chair, who has been
doing a tremendous work getting the right picture of all our members. So,
Joan, you have the mic.
Joan Kerr:

Thank you, Rudi. Joan Kerr for the record. So I’m just going to do a pretty
quick summary. As Rudi mentioned, actually it was Maryam and I that worked
on the database and cleaned it up and we do have 63 new members, our
members.
From some of our calls it’s obvious that we – it’s one thing to clear up the
database and to have a clean database but the biggest thing that has
happened is that we need to engage our members and outreach as well. So
that’s something that, you know, as chair I’m going to really focus is how do
we get our members to connect with us on calls and become involved when
we're at conferences.
And not just be names on a piece of paper because that doesn’t work. We
need them to participate in ICANN. We need to educate them on how they
can participate and give them information. So that’s something that I’m going
to focus on with the ExComm this coming year. And that’s all I have to say for
now. Thank you.

Rudi Vansnick:

Thank you, Joan. Rudi for the record. I don’t know if there are other
colleagues who want to give some reports. Sam?

Sam Lanfranco:

Yes, Sam Lanfranco for the record. One of the ideas that I had proposed
earlier that was not supported by NPOC, was to use the opportunity of the
comments on the comments periods on ICANN proposals to engage the
membership. And it was felt by several that that was engaging them too late.
I’d like to report that that now has been picked up as an initiative by ICANN
itself and ICANN will be rolling out a program after this meeting in which they
prepare briefing documents to go out to the constituencies to encourage them
to get engaged in the comment periods as a way – as a kind of backend way

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 5

of bringing people more involved and then eventually into the PDPs and
working groups.
Rudi Vansnick:

Thank you, Sam. Rudi for the record. We know that, as there are many
changes happening in the structure and in ICANN now, essentially due to the
finalization of the IANA transition proposal and the review and report done by
NTIA, it looks like things are in good shape. But there are still quite a lot going
on due to the fact that there is this – these changes of the bylaws are going to
have an impact on all of us and especially as we heard that there will be a
quite important number of reviews that will kick off.
And in general it was, yes, it was Sunday during the SO/AC leadership
meeting that we got a list of reviews that are on schedule for the next year –
well, the next 12 months. And it is a big list as Tapani can probably confirm
also. And they are requesting volunteers to participate in it again.
The big changes that the number of participants in the review team goes from
12-21 which means it’s almost doubling the number of members that are
needed for the reviews, that’s really massive. Just a question of how this will
happen and how this will be done. Not an easy point.
With that I think if there are no questions on NPOC’s operations in the past
months I could move on to the next item, it’s NPOC financial report. I’ve put
together, and all the details will be sent to the ExComm in the next few days,
but I’ve made a summary of the three years – sorry – of the finance and
account.
In 2014 we started with an amount of $4000 – well, the account is in US
dollars and the account is in Europe, which means we can have the
conversion done in the same bank and the same account. It makes it a little
bit complex with the conversions but I will give the figures only in US dollars,
which makes it more easy.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 6

So we started with $4711.95 US which was the amount that we got from – in
2013 from PIR also. And in 2014 we started getting funding of PIR for
$10,000. That was initially for an event that we have organized in Singapore.
And then altogether the cost of that event and operation was $4756.81 US.
I will, as I said, I will give all the figures on the ExComm list after this meeting
too. We had also in LA a little event that was about $550 US. There has been
the hosting mailing services and so on for 2014. It was $2535 US.
And we had some bank administrative costs that we have everywhere in the
world. You have to pay a cost which was $26.32 US. The figures are always
with cents as the conversion takes place based on the euro. Which brought
us with an amount of $6878.23 US end of 2014.
And 2015 we got a funding again from PIR for $5000. And then we had,
again, the cost for the hosting, the mail services and so on for $2678.65. In
fact, there is a difference between 2014 and 2015 due to the conversion rate
of the US dollar. And that left us with an amount of $9199.58 US at end 2015.
Two thousand sixteen, we had already the administrative costs that, in fact,
should be booked on 2015 but we only got it in 2016 on the account. And the
hosting, mail services that I put into account are $1799.98 US. That means
that today we have, on the account, $7388.70 US available.
That is in fact the overview of the three years finances of NPOC. I’m going
around the table. Are there any questions about these figures, these
amounts, this report? Yes, Joan?
Joan Kerr:

Thank you, Rudi. So that was the money that was allocated – that we were
talking about the special events that we were supposed to have in Marrakech
and in Helsinki. That was the money that it was coming from for those
events?

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 7

Rudi Vansnick:

No, you’re talking about the budget that is allocated by ICANN.

Joan Kerr:

Okay.

Rudi Vansnick:

That’s different. That’s different.

((Crosstalk))
Rudi Vansnick:

That’s not on this report.

Joan Kerr:

Oh okay.

Rudi Vansnick:

And I think that’s something we don't have actually in – we don’t have any
budget allocated to us as far as I remember. They stopped giving and budget
allocation for the constituencies two years ago if I’m not wrong. It’s all
covered inside the budget of ICANN itself.

Joan Kerr:

So originally what was that money allocated for?

Rudi Vansnick:

Sorry, I was interrupted.

Joan Kerr:

Okay, what was the funding allocated for? Was it a specific thing or it was
just…

Rudi Vansnick:

Well, PIR has been funding and sponsoring us for if we wanted to organize
events and so on, which was the first time the case in 2014 when we had that
meeting organized in Singapore. And, yes, we could use it for events if there
is any way we can really set it up. But I think we should count on what ICANN
can support us in order not to use our own budget. But because it’s work we
do for ICANN, not for ourselves.
Any other question? With that I will give all the details with all the elements.
I’ve sent already some information to the ExComm list but I will provide all the

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 8

little details after Helsinki. I’ve been putting everything together, but I need
also some paperwork to add to it.
Something that I need to mention anyway is that as NPOC is not an official
body, it’s not incorporated, it’s not really existing as a body itself, I personally
have all the responsibility and I have to pay taxes as it is considered being
income revenue so I have to pay some taxes on what is coming in. I’m trying
to get rid of that misery but – you’re laughing, Klaus?
That’s, yes, the risk you take when you do something like that. Yes, Sam?
Sam Lanfranco:

Okay Sam for the record. The taxes issue, doubly (unintelligible). I think that
we should have – even when they’re nominal expenditures that it would be
useful for the group to actually pass on them and make a motion and say yes
we’re going to spend this money for this, including compensating you, if
you’ve got out of pocket expenses for something. And there’s an invoice
available for that so that we have a kind of accountable and transparent
record of all the transactions. So they would be in our minutes.

Rudi Vansnick:

Yes, of course. And I’m discussing this with the Belgian government as they
need to understand that it’s not money that is in revenue for me but it’s for the
organization. But they – as you know, in Europe they are very anxious about
what happens in the US at that point so there is a lot of discussion going
about money laundering and that’s where you need to do some checkups,
yes, quite often.
Okay if there are no – yes, Sam.

Sam Lanfranco:

I mean, it would also be useful to you if you had the transcripts of the
meetings where the numbers were discussed and the decisions were made.

Rudi Vansnick:

Sure. With that I think we can conclude this – well, yes, Klaus.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 9

Klaus Stoll:

Yes, and I think we should – as we didn’t have any kind of financial report
along for the two and a half or so years, it’s good idea to spend a little bit of
the money which is left on the professional independent audit and I think
that’s a very good thing to do.

Rudi Vansnick:

No problem. With that. Rudi for the record. By the way, meanwhile, I’ve got
the results of our elections. And the results of the elections were done at – on
28th of June at 2359 UTC. And the results are as follows.
Chair of NPOC, Klaus Stoll. The Vice Chair NPOC, Martin Pablo Silva Valent.
Communication Committee Chair, Juan Manuel Rojas. Membership
Committee Chair, Joan Kerr. And NPOC Secretariat, Olevie Kouamie. I want
to congratulate the members who have been elected. And with that I will,
after this meeting, hand over the chair seat to Klaus Stoll.
So let’s move on with Number 5 on the agenda, discussion of the ongoing
international Red Cross issues with ICANN. And I think it’s Sam who brought
that to the table. Are you willing to report on that one?

Sam Lanfranco:

I’m willing to open the discussion on that, yes. Thank you, Rudi. I was first
prompted to bring it to the table when Carlos mentioned that there had been
a discussion in GNSO without us knowing about it. And then I had gotten
concerned because that was the – one of the issues that was responsible for
the original creation of NPOC to begin with.
Sort of supplemental to that I went yesterday to the session in which the
issue was being discussed. And what I want to report on is basically my
impression of that session. Rudi was there so Rudi may want to add to this.
Initially it was a discussion involving the International Olympic Committee, the
International Red Cross Red Crescent and was distilled down to issues
around international IGOs – international governmental organizations and
international nongovernment organizations.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 10

It has basically been boiled down to only dealing with international
governmental organizations as far as I can tell and primarily the Red Cross.
And it is basically down to some very narrow technical questions about how
conflict resolution is handled on some of the issues and how that impinges on
the international Red Cross’s – I don’t know if the right word is diplomatic
immunity but its rights as a kind of international governmental organization.
And as far as I’m concerned, and I’d be interested in Rudi’s view on this, that
has almost nothing to do with the existing remit in the charter of NPOC. That
NPOC could basically say to that one, it’s – they’ve retained expert opinion,
they have lawyers working on it. It’s a very narrow technical question that has
very little relevance to the rest of our constituency.
I see Klaus has a hand up so I’ll quit.
Klaus Stoll:

I was actually at the meeting where all that started. And I’m not the one who
founded NPOC but basically, as you know, (unintelligible) got into the whole
thing basically the meeting after. And look at the name of NPOC and there is
a clue, operational concerns.
And it was operational concerns of NGOs of non for profit organizations like
the Olympic Committee or like the Red Cross. This is what we were founded
for, operational concerns. And its operational concern if the Red Cross has
that privilege or the IOC has a privilege or not.
So it’s a very, very close to our heart and it’s exactly to our topic. Which
complicated the whole thing and was the cleverest trick I’d ever seen in the
book was to combine the Red Cross with the International Olympic
Committee. Everybody has no problem with the Red Cross having the status
and everybody has a problem with the IOC having the status.

((Crosstalk))

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 11

Klaus Stoll:

No, because it’s been now discussed for 5.5 years. Everything that could be
said has been said. It just – because if we come to a decision, if we vote, if
we get every single participant in ICANN to vote and say unanimously 100%
we decide that and that and that, there will be a lawyer crawling out of the
window and saying I challenge you on that. This is a non-resolvable issue.
So what we have to do is basically – I think it’s very important that we have a
look back at what the situation is, talk to some people in the – and I’m sorry to
say, talk to some of the lawyers, and trying to find out if there’s anything for
us still to do. And I just find it very interesting because if you look at the
history of NPOC basically it’s one was created by two lawyers from parties
concerned. And they don’t even talk to us anymore.

Rudi Vansnick:

Yes, thank you, Sam and Klaus. And based on the discussions that we had in
the IGO INGO afterwards too yesterday, it’s very clear that IGOs and INGOs
can call on their immunity but if they are taken to court they have to take it
down.
And, again, as Klaus was mentioning, it’s the game of the lawyers that will
decide in what direction they win or lose the game. I don’t see a real – the
problem is not resolved and I’m considering that that will go on for a while as,
yes, business most often has more rights than the non-business community.
Yes, Sam.

Sam Lanfranco:

Well just to restate what was said earlier, and underlined it, I think that it
essentially is – it’s like an aggregate – aggravate inside NPOC and that we
basically sort of decide. It will not be resolved. Any moves toward resolution
will be taking place completely outside our remit, outside our domain. We
should come back and focus on the not for profit sector and their concerns.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 12

Rudi Vansnick:

Thank you, Sam. Rudi for the record. As we have a councilor among us I
don’t know if, Carlos, you have any vision on how the Council looks at these
discussions?

Carlos Gutierrez: Yes, I mean, this is a long-standing issue that you are not aware what the
Council discussed. I have no explanation for. But this has been in the agenda
all the time. There was a webinar to refresh everybody on the issue. It was
held on a few weeks ago, two three weeks ago. It was very thinly visited so
nobody cares. The presentation was distributed. Mary Wong did a wonderful
presentation specifically on the Red Cross.
And in the Board Council meeting we reminded the Board that we had written
to the Board in May explaining the last discussions and movements and
making them aware that we have no clear indication from the Board to the
Council on this issue.
And we reminded the Board that they owe us an answer there. There are
some propositions there. It’s not an international organization sadly. The
discussion is very, very limited to the second level. It’s not even about the top
level. So it’s really the doldrums and the Red Cross people come to all
meetings and speak to everybody but there is not a sensible proposal like
how do we deal with the first – with the top level and how to get you closer
either to the trademarks or to the international organizations so it lives in the
limbo. But certainly nobody has a clue what the next step is; I mean, the
Council or the Board or the NPOC. Thank you.
Rudi Vansnick:

Thank you, Carlos. Rudi for the record. Well, I think as you mentioned, it’s a
question of trademark, non-trademark. And quite often trademark means it
costs money and probably that’s something the (unintelligible) also want to
avoid to get – to pay for all the trademarks across the world and…

Carlos Gutierrez: I mean, if you’re a local Red Cross organization, at least in my country they
are collecting money all the time. I don’t understand they don’t have $100 a

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 13

year to protect their domain name at least at the second level under the
ccTLD. And even the ISOC Costa Rica chapter got a one-year free from our
ccTLD and we pay only $20 a year after that. So I guess any Red Cross can
come to its ccTLD and ask for an NGO approach but the issue really lacks
any vision, mother, father, relatives, whatsoever.
Rudi Vansnick:

Thank you, Carlos. Sam, you…

Sam Lanfranco:

Yes, my sense, listening to the – what – of the discussion I have heard is just
that there’s a fear of an issue ending up in the courts, period. Because that
triggers some other questions. As far as NPOC is concerned, I don’t know if I
should propose that we have a motion but I think we just view it as an issue
for which we have no position.

((Crosstalk))
Sam Lanfranco:

No.

Rudi Vansnick:

Red Cross, there is the British one, we have three national Red Cross
members. I was in contact with the one in the UK. And I sent them even a
request to respond to one of the questions that happened in PDP. And they
asked me, well, give us time; I’m still waiting for their response. It’s two
months – more than two months ago. So it’s very unclear what’s the goal of
Red Cross is in all these discussions. I have the impression that they rather
would like to see somebody else taking it up and finalize it rather than
themselves like going to the end of the discussion.

Klaus Stoll:

Klaus for the record. But seriously, I mean, what you just said it’s absolute –
when we talked and talked and talked about it. The danger – and the
advantage here is this is everything NPOC is about. And on the other hand,
as I said, I mean, we’re talking about it now for five years. I think there is
somewhere where we have now to – for NPOC what our lessons learned out
of it and how do we as NPOC have to react to that.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 14

And I think one of the answer is quite – is screaming into our faces, quite
simply, we have to be more systematically active in the actual policy making
processes and monitor that somehow better and participate in the working
groups and so on in a different way. It’s not about just participating, it’s about
having a strategy behind it.
And that is – and the – it’s fairly impossible with the kind of minimalized
membership we have at the moment. But it’s something we can start working
on. And I think that will attract members back because a lot of the bigger
NGOs and so on, have very, very similar problems and IGOs. They’re very,
very similar problems.
And one of the position of us could simply be can you help us to solve that
problem. And that’s going and saying we are your voices and we’re fight for
you and say, by the way, we’re supposed to fight for you, but we have no
idea what to do. Thank you.
Rudi Vansnick:

Thank you, Klaus. Rudi for the record. With that we are in fact entering into
Number 6 of our agenda. With this item, as we didn’t know the results of the
election before, I thought it was important to have this on the agenda. But as I
will no longer be even part of the ExComm, I would like to leave here the
discussion and allow the new ExComm to take up the future of NPOC after
the elections. I have to mention to you that I will step down from all the
working groups after the Helsinki meeting.
There is one mandate that was asked to me to stay on until the end of the
year as this is a mandate by calendar year. And I’ve committed that I will do
my best to finish that task. It’s the SCI where I will keep the work done until
the end of the year. Probably we will not get any new stuff on the table as the
two issues are finalized now. We will see if that’s going to end.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 15

So with that I would like to hand over the discussion about the future of
NPOC to the new ExComm. I don’t know who wants to pick up this point as I
think it’s important that the new ExComm decides on what way you would
work.
Martin…
Martin Valent:

Yes, just to say I will step in the water and try. I think we have to draft a plan
that we all can agree on and we can all know and so far we have already
tried a few things. We have learned what works, what not. I agree with the
fact that we should be working with the big INGOs like Red Cross simply
because I believe we have such synergy that if we manage to get them to
work with us that would really, really, really improve our work.
So that I believe we have these two different things. One is policy work, the
other one is outreach. I believe we have to have this different programs for
each one. We already have that logic. I would continue upon it. A big
question that I cannot answer is regarding how is NPOC going to evolve in
the environment of NCSG. I think that a lot of that has to be answered yet.
And if it’s going to be relevant to our plan and until we actually knows
(unintelligible) how that is going to evolve, we have to continue creating a
working plan for the next year.
I propose we do this in the next few months to take our time and to do a
proper management plan for the next months.

Klaus Stoll:

Klaus Stoll for the record. First of all, I think we should look back and I want to
thank Rudi for two years of his work and what he did. And he's acknowledged
the emphasis and all the hard work you put in there so first of all, thank you,
Rudi.
The second thing which I would like to talk about the future of NPOC and I
want to make several fundamental changes. And there first change is that as

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 16

chair, I don’t understand myself as the decision maker or leader of this one, I
literally will push this down now to people like Martin, Poncelet and everybody
in the ExComm, but also in the membership. I’m expecting that the major
initiatives and the major changes and the major proposals, the major things,
are not coming from me. I see myself as a coordinator, but not as a decision
maker. And really trust on people, as I said, Martin, Poncelet, and everybody
else, to do this job.
Because, look, if we replace Rudi by Klaus, you get all the same again. And
that doesn’t work and it didn’t work in the past so we have to try something
new. So everybody who has been elected or not been elected, you're still
called on. And the leader of all this and the leader of NPOC is you, not Klaus.
The other thing is on the very practical term, because it’s always a problem,
and I’m sorry that I’m bringing it up, it’s about travel. Nobody in the ExComm
will automatically be nominated for the next travel slot for the next ICANN
meeting. Everybody, including me, has to prove, before they are nominated,
that they actually have a job to do at the next meeting. If they don't have a job
to do in the next meeting they will participate remotely.
And that will open us up – first of all it would make us more productive, and
secondly, it actually – the members will have a chance to do things. For
example, some of the – of the stuff which was done in Argentina is important
that we enable these people to stay in the ICANN meeting rotation, whereas
other people like me, maybe we can do it – even as I chair I think I can do –
Hyderabad looks like I can do the same stuff in Hyderabad remotely than
being there.
So and this is the kind of changes I really would like to make. And again, the
important thing is this is not now the era of Klaus, this will be the era
members. That’s my idea and my proposal for the future – very rough
proposal for the future of NPOC.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 17

With regards to outreach, please allow me, we worked over the last few
weeks on a very comprehensive membership and outreach plan. And we
realized, for example, also financially, it doesn’t work if we put out an
outreach plan and looking at ICANN to fund it or looking at ourselves or own
budget to fund it. We need partners and we need a little bit of – little bit of
more cash than what we have around usual.
So in preparation there are already some talks going on. There are already
meeting have happened for – where basically some partnerships are agreed
and this is something which now that the election is over, will be made public.
And nothing is decided, it’s all just for discussion but there is a lot of
groundwork already been done and that can be implemented.
Again, it will not be implemented by me; it will not even guide it or driven by
me. It’s there for the members, for the ExComm to take and to do it or not.
Now I’ve spoken too much anyway.
Rudi Vansnick:

Yes, Joan. Oh yes, Carlos.

Carlos Gutierrez: Thank you very much. This is Carlos for the record. And first of all, I want to
remind you that I’m not a representative of NPOC in the Council and my term
in the Council ends in Hyderabad. So if you want to know what’s happening
in the Council you will have to do something about that.
Second to what’s urgent, there are important things, there are urgent things. I
mean, there are two very urgent things. I mean, in two hours or one hour we
will be discussing the follow up of Los Angeles discussion. What do we want
for the future of the Non-Contracted Party House, if I’m right. So this is – we
had a proposal and we had a questionnaire and we’re going to discuss the
feedback to the questionnaire.
And this is, I think, very urgent because also this week the members of the
team that should take the task to review the GNSO procedures in terms of

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 18

the adoption of the adaptation of the new bylaws to the transition, is going to
start very soon. And that’s going to affect the whole GNSO and that’s going to
affect NPOC as well.
So I don’t know, Martin, if we have months. I think we have a few days to
decide together with the Non-Commercial User Constituency because we are
drafting the charter. We are between – if we are going to have
representatives only of the stakeholder groups or if we are going to have
representatives of the constituencies only or a mixture of both, cannot be too
many people. Some people have strong opinion how it should work. If it
should be limited to two people for each stakeholder group. And that would
make 8.
And the clock is running because we expect the new – the transition legally to
be over by November 1, I think that’s what I heard. So this is an urgent task
where NPOC has to fight for its internal recognition within the GNSO Council
at all. So that really I strongly recommend that is taken immediately. And I
don’t know if it’s Klaus or Martin or both or all, but those are things that we
have to follow up as soon as possible starting today and starting tomorrow
when we do the GNSO Council wrap up. Thank you.
Rudi Vansnick:

Thank you, Carlos. To add to that, as I’m one of the two people that took the
lead in putting it on the table because nobody wanted to start the discussion
about reviewing the future of the GNSO from the bottom up, Tony and me,
we have been working in the background quite a lot to get things on paper.
And have visions on what is possible and possible scenarios. And we have
been even querying a time slot in this Helsinki meeting, and unfortunately we
couldn’t do it really earlier than I think it was last Wednesday, Maryam, if I’m
not wrong, that we got a time slot for the NCPH meeting this noon.
It was really difficult to find a way to get it on the agenda. But it’s on it. And I
will still look with Tony and lead it this noon. But after that I would like to see
somebody from NPOC taking over that position. Martin. Or sorry, Joan.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 19

Joan Kerr:

Thank you. Joan Kerr for the record. So, Klaus, I just wanted to clarify
something. The – you mentioned partnership going forward for the – we’re on
future after the election. What is the nature? What is the reason, and the
purpose for the partnerships? And also, one of the things that we haven’t
done as an ExComm is to clearly engage our members how will the
partnership help us do that?

Klaus Stoll:

Joan, thank you for the questions. Actually really good question. I think that
one of the problems with Internet governance, and is quite simply that you
can’t actually work inside silos. To be – if you work inside the silos that
means you work in your constituency and you work in the nonprofit sector, in
our case, for example, alone. You don’t get very far because basically you
need to reach out to the private sector and the government sector for
minimum, to get things done.
And so, for example, what I mean with partnership is to give you very
concrete example, is it’s very important for us – I think for us as NPOC but it’s
open for discussion – to partner with other Internet governance forums like
the business and like the IGF. There’s a lot of – there is a lot of activities
going on there. There is especially – in the – with respect to our members to
– why is that relevant to our members.
Because it is – with the sustainable government goals, our members are
active in the sustainable development goals. They’re trying to do things.
These things are not happening in ICANN, these things are happening in
other fora. And we need to connect and we need to coordinate and we need
to be visible in these things to make it happen.
The practical reason is quite simply so how do we pay for that? And to be
absolutely honest with you, there are – there are corporations and
foundations around which would like to support this for good reasons,
(unintelligible) reasons, social corporate responsibility reasons. And simply

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 20

taking the advantage of saying we do that. And I think, as long as we – as
long as we stay completely transparent and ethical and non-binding, we
should take advantage of that to do this.
Joan Kerr:

I just have a follow up question. So I’m not against partnership, of course, I
actually agree that you cannot act alone. But one of the things that we really,
I think as an ExComm, didn’t do in terms of our responsibility as an ICANN
constituency was policy. We’re not involved enough. So how, I mean, I’m not
saying we don’t do this, but we have two major things to go forward.
From a – I’m always speaking from a membership point of view. To engage
our members, obviously we’d like to increase them, but also to get more
involved in the policy portion of what – responsibility that we’re supposed to
do. So are we going to be – it’s one thing to have partnerships to get funding
so – and which chair is going to do that. But I think it’s loud and clear that we
don’t engage our members enough and we don’t participate enough in the
policy process. So I just want to…

Klaus Stoll:

Sorry, Joan. Absolutely right. And I refuse to comment any further and put it
over to Martin.

Martin Valent:

And to quickly answer, I think or add something to Joan’s question or
concern, it’s compatible, I mean, we are talking about looking for the senior G
or the help of the NGOs or big partners, but the truth is afterwards the
outreach plans have to be absolutely aimed to policy development. I mean,
there’s not – that – (unintelligible) incompatibility. Is not a reaching out to
these partnerships, it’s not in the same aim or goal of (unintelligible) members
to policy.
And as we have later a meeting with Janice, we are actually trying to
approach this from a more scientific matter and from expertise on how to
actually get the members that we can get from outreach involved in the most

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 21

effective and efficient way. So in that sense I don’t see that – that’s just the
aim of it at all at the end.
Tapani Tarvainen: If I may? I’m not an NPOC member but I’d like to make a few points. First, I’d
like to also thank Rudi for all the hard work you’ve been doing for a long time.
And second, just a suggestion for NPOC, do run a candidate for the Council
elections. You should have a councilor, although you won’t get one if you
don’t even try.
Sam Lanfranco:

Two comments. One is just to remind us that the Workstream 2 committees
are being formed now. People are being recruited. So one of the things we
need to do is populate those. Several of us have populated some of them so
that’s one of the high, you know, the high ranking agenda items.
The other is the comment about partnership and engagement. I represent the
Canadian Society for International Health. Our perspective around the
Internet has to make sense in terms of what we do as an NGO. Many of the
policy issues are of no win for us. They're just not what we're interested in. So
what I’m doing, beyond NPOC and beyond ICANN, is starting from the
sustainable development goals, Number 17 happens to be enhancing
partnership as one of the 17 goals.
But starting from the constituency’s self interest in terms of their remit, their
charter, their mission and vision and working backward to ICANN to say,
okay, if ICANN is going to approach them, if we are going to approach them
as NPOC, we don’t have to – we don’t want to go out and try and strong arm
them into being volunteer labor in the policy positions that we see. We have
to help them understand how these policy positions relate to what they do.
And if we don’t do that my advice to them is do not show up. Period. If all we
are is like in a religious organization saying come joint our religion, it’s up to
us to explain to them why what we do is relevant to what they do. And without

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 22

that they are not coming. And I’m saying that as a development economist
who works with those groups outside ICANN.
Rudi Vansnick:

I see that the discussion is falling down. Still as an NPOC member, I have to
mention you that – and it should be on your priorities list, that there is no chair
for the policy committee, which is, to me a really bad sign about participation
in policy. So I would encourage the new ExComm to focus on getting
somebody on that seat.

Klaus Stoll:

As a reply to that, Rudi, you’re absolutely right. We – but we shouldn’t bind it
on a person, we are all policy. This is what we are all about. And we have to
find a way that we have – yes, we have somebody who is responsible for
coordinating the policy stuff, that we find way to do the policies together as a
team in NPOC. And that the policy chair, or basically is the megaphone of the
person who basically transmitted.

Carlos Gutierrez: I want to give another view from the Council. I mean, the policy work is very
simple. Is absolutely very, very simple for the next two years. Is only three
subjects and they’re closely related to each other, is very, very simple. Is right
protection mechanism, Whois and subsequent rounds. And everything is
bounded – directly bounded together. I’m very happy that I hear Martin is
particularly interested in the right protection mechanism and is going to follow
that one.
We just need somebody for Whois and we need two, three people or 10
people or 25 people for the subsequent rounds. That’s it. That’s policy. And if
you don’t like ICANN policy, you don’t need to be here. You can move to
ALAC or to any other place. So it’s very, very simple. And as Tapani just said,
I mean, we’re wasting our representation in the Council. I mean, that goes all
together, is the same, is the representative in the Council, the policy
coordination and getting people together to participate there.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 23

I thank you for suggesting my name. We are under great stress. We have to
present a first draft of the competition review in Hyderabad. And that’s a lot of
work, and that’s everything I can do. And I really have to concentrate. But
because I am part of the team with this support of the GNSO. So that’s my
responsibility until the end of the year.
But I think it’s a very clear – I mean, I’ve been four years here and – in
ICANN and sometimes I wonder what’s happening. I think this time is very,
very simple, is Workstream 2 of accountability and three PDPs. And they
overlap in many, many, many issues so it’s a very, very clear policy agenda
that ICANN has. It’s rather simple.
So I think it’s very easy to explain that to any partner or any member. And if
you ask me, what my perspective is, why I’m here it’s very simple, I mean,
particularly for developing countries or underserved areas, or NGOs working
in development is for me the same, you have two possibilities.
Either you get a sensible domain name for your community, project, NGO, or
so or you end up in Facebook. Okay, that’s the choice. I mean, that’s very,
very simple. I mean, either you keep your freedom, your privacy, your
webpage, your initiative, your collection, or you do it in Facebook.
And if that’s not important for all developing agencies, they haven't gotten it,
as you said.
And I can explain that in five minutes. I don't know if they will understand me
but that’s the reason why I think we have relevant work to do everywhere in
the world closely related to the domain name system. Either you are at the
third level with Facebook or Google, or you have your own presentation card.
Thank you.
Sam Lanfranco:

Sam for the record. I agree with you completely. Except…

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/11:26 pm CT
Confirmation #8995835
Page 24

((Crosstalk))
Sam Lanfranco:

But, when I am talking to them and we talk about that choice, second level,
third level, which is, you know, where I come in at, they agree or they don’t
agree, they see the challenges for them at their level and in their resource
constraints they say, we need to work on this at our level, but we don’t have
the resources to come up and work with you on those working groups. We
have resource constraints, we have technical constraints and so forth.
So one of the approaches is to go not to them individually but to go to the
groups that represent them and work at that level so that’s one of the
strategies that I, as a private member of NPOC, will be doing.
But it’s for them to see a viable win in terms of how they deploy their limited
resources in the short run. There’s no disagreement on that bigger issue. But
they can’t get into that – they can’t afford to get there for the most part at this
point.

((Crosstalk))
Rudi Vansnick:

Yes, thank you, Sam. I was just wondering I think we can round up – I think
we handled every item that we needed. And thanks, Carlos, for your – the
beautiful picture you made about the two ways you have in life, Facebook or
no book at all. Thank you all and, yes, it’s my last ICANN meeting for this.

Maryam Bakoshi: Thank you very much.

END

