ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 1

ICANN Transcript
Thick Whois Implementation IRT meeting Part 2
30 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at
The recordings and transcriptions of the calls are posted on the GNSO Master Calendar
page http://gnso.icann.org/en/group-activities/calendar

Dennis Chang:

Everyone. It's 9:15 and we'll get started here. Thank you everyone for coming
back for our second session at the ICANN 56 Helsinki Stakeholders Policy
Implementation IRT Meeting.
So this is a continuation from yesterday's conversation. And again, my name
is Dennis Chang, GDD Services and Engagement Program Director. And I
will be moderating this session today.
I think everyone's been here yesterday so we're - skip the introduction and go
right to business. We have a long agenda. And I have an announcement to
make. I know that yesterday we wanted to talk longer but we couldn't because
there was a session immediately following ours.
So today we have managed to secure the room for 30 additional minutes. And
what I'd like to know from the IRT is your flexibility in going longer than

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 2

scheduled. Let me see a show of hands if you have a hard stop or you can go
longer. Which one is it? Hard stop. Anybody else?
Man:

Hard stop.

((Crosstalk))
Dennis Chang:

Three? Okay. That means we'll have to press on. And if you wouldn't mind, I
don't mean to be rude but I am going to maybe, you know, press you a little
bit harder to get going and not a lot of repeated conversations hopefully. So
we'll get started right away (next).
So today's agenda is a priority item for us today is the consensus labeling and
display. This is the policy that we would like to announce next month for an
effective date of February 1 - by January, February of next year.
And so this is a pressing topic of the day. So if at all possible at this session
we would like to gain understanding, perhaps consensus and ask all your
question and have you dialog conversation here today so that when you go
back home you have no homework. Isn't that nice? That's an incentive.
The second topic is the notification to GNSO Council for our conversation
yesterday. So we did some homework and we're going to let you know what
we found out and the process; how we go about that.
The third is the implementation timeline that we were talking about yesterday
and will continue to gain more understanding there and see if we can come to
a consensus there as well.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 3

So the consistent labeling and display; this is the same chart we showed you
yesterday. And let me turn it over to (Fabian) right here. (Fabian), go ahead
and take it away.
(Fabian):

Thank you Dennis. Hello everyone. So actually it's a new slide that complies
some of the information that we've exchanged over the last few months. We
just wanted to remind everyone of the, you know, the high level (with types)
every comment we got or the feedback we got during the public comment
period on the initial draft of the policy language.
Then the discussion we've had with you in the IRT and finally explain what
we (will do) with the revisions of the - in terms of revision to the policy
language.
So very quickly, in terms of feedback in the public comments, you may recall
there were concerns with the time taken to implement the transition. So that's
not per se consistent labeling and display. And you know how we've been
progressing on that. Concerns that we have been (in fact) of our interpretation
of consistent.
They were concerned around the need to collect new data around the reseller
information and registrar expiration date. Concern that that date would also
create confusion for end users. And there was also concern that the reseller
information would have a pretty serious impact on the registrar operation.
The community - there was an alternative implementation proposal in the
community that suggested that the reseller and registrar expiration date be
optional. And finally there were concerns that the proposed policy would have
an negative impact on the registry's contractual framework due to the
references in the policy to the 2013 RAA as well as the (unintelligible).

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 4

In subsequent discussion with the IRT you may also recall that there were a
suggestion that we not require any measures (to mediate confusion) for those
registries that would display the registrar expiration date - would choose to
display the registrar expiration date.
We also discussed how the expiration date confusion issue may be referred.
We initially thought about the RDS PDP but some of you suggested that we
consider the GNSO instead and that this was for seeking a long-term solution,
which was indeed our intent.
And finally in terms of the reference of 2013 (IANA) policy some of you
asked that we clarify or suggested that we clarify the policy in an intent to
establish a current linkage there.
So essentially what we did in terms of revising the language. First of all we
simplified the language. You may recall that in our language we had - we
covered consistent labeling and display as well as the transition although there
was no effective date for the transition part of it.
So we decided that we should separate those two to have two different sets of
policy language. So what we're going to present to you is specific consistent
labeling and display. We believe that this will bring more clarity to everyone.
We've aligned the language with the comments we received and in particular
by making optional reseller and registrar expiration data as we explained
yesterday.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 5

And finally we've clarified several items, in particular we're removed the
reference to 2013 RAA and replaced it with an actual (sophistication) of the
changes that would apply to the RDS output for registries.
And in terms of the re-clarification we have made clear that this is a
complement to the policy language; it's not a (big) piece of it. So let's look let's take a look at the document.
So before we get through the revised policy, let me show the draft policy we
submitted for public comment just as a reminder. So as you might remember,
we had a section containing the consensus policy and then some
implementation notes.
The policy section was rather short. The one here was a reminder of the policy
recommendation - was actually sort of rewriting of the - or copy of the
adaptation of the working group recommendation. And Bullet 2 here was our
references to the fact that the RDDS output should be consistent with Spec 3
of the 2013 RAA as well as the (Whois Clarification) Advisory.
And so we had three phases. Phase 1 and Phase 2 are two parts of consistent
labeling and display. And then Phase 3 was the transition. So in effect our
taking into account of the comments meant that Phase 2 should not exist
anymore. But then that would have left us, you know, with a phase of
transition still hanging with no effective date. So we've decided to switch that.
So now let me go to the revised policy that, as Dennis mentioned, I believe we
shared yesterday on the mailing list. So you may be able to get your own
copy. Okay. Here it is.
Dennis Chang:

Can I just confirm with everyone that you received it. Yes. Thanks.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 6

(Fabian):

Okay. So here it is. I need to browse quickly through the (unintelligible) and
we'll look in detail. So first of all, we've changed the title. This is the Registry
Registration Data Directory Services, RDDS, Registrar DDS Consistent
Labeling and Display Policy.
We - you see here that's the specification I talked about of the changes that
apply to RDDS output. So we'll get to that in more detail. And you see here
that we have throughout 13 bullets and effective date of 1 February 2017. And
then we have short implementation notes that refer here to the advisory and
also provide an example output for all intent and purposes.
And finally at the end we have a section with the background of how - where
this policy come from. So okay. This was just an overview. Let's go back to
the first page.
So, as I mentioned, instead of adding a reference to the 2013 RAA, we
worked off of a reference to the current base agreement, which - base registry
agreement Specification 4 to which we're adding some requirements.
So Number 1 is the positioning of the registrar with contact email and so on.
As far as the communities (probably) in the public comment, there was an
agreement that those should be displayed by registries.
So Bullet 1 here specify where those two should be placed in the output. Then
- so then we stop here see if there is any specific comments.

Dennis Chang:

Any comments in the room? Adobe Connect? Go on.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 7

(Fabian):

So then Bullets 2 to 5 are those that refer to the registrar registration
expiration date and with other information. And so here in those four bullets
we indicate that those are optional, that if they're shown they must appear - so
the reseller information that appear after - sorry, before the main status.
If shown the value of reseller must be the name of the organization if it's a
legal entity. Otherwise it's a natural person's name. And then use the registrar
registration expiration date is shown at - must appear immediately after the
registry expiry date.
I'll just pause a second. See if there's any comment or question. So that was
for Bullets 2 through 5. Okay.

Dennis Chang:

None here.

(Fabian):

Okay. So six is about the - is specifying the format of the value for this
contact, email and phone, reseller and registrar expiration date by making
references to either the (unintelligible) or the extensible market language.
Then Bullet 7. Seven is about the name of the keys or fields in the RDDS
output. So left column is the original name in the current Specification 4. The
second column is the new name per consistency with the 2013 RAA. And then
last column refers to the type of query to which a response - to which a
response provided need to include those (in IT).
So this is again to clarify and (it's still) referring to the 2013 RAA
(sophistication); we're providing the details here to make sure that this is
crystal clear. Let me stop here a second. See if there is any comments or
question.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 8

Dennis Chang:

None here.

(Fabian):

Okay. That might be because it's either quite early or very late.

Dennis Change:

So let me pause and ask a question. So the Implementation Team they came
up with this new document format felt that this type of format and
presentation worked much more clear and it's an improvement. So I'm hoping
the lack of questions is a good sign here that we are communicating much
more clearly with this document. Any feedback on the format?

Joe Waldron:

Thanks Dennis. This is Joe. Yes. No, I think it is - I think it is clear. It is a bit
of a revision from the previous one. So I think that, you know, while I think
everybody's had a chance to read it, I think that we still need time to kind of
digest and compare and, you know, really examine this pretty carefully, so.

(Fabian):

Yes. Thank you Joe. I was just going to say this is why we wanted to take
some time this morning so that we get a chance to walk everyone through it in
addition us yesterday. And we have requested that IRT members provide their
review to it by the end of next week.
So we hope that the combination of our taking this time today and providing,
you know, more than a week for review is going to be enough for IRT
members to review the document.

Dennis Chang:

(Krista).

Krista Papac:

It's Krista Papac. Thanks Dennis. Krista Papac from ICANN staff. Just to add
to what Dennis said. The format is different and I mean I think this in a note
(Fabian) sent last night. And absolutely Joe, you guys need to take a look at it
for sure.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 9

But we - it's more of a formatting change and not too many substantive
changes other than to incorporate the guidance from you guys. And I agree
with Dennis. I'm hoping that the lack of questions is both you need to look at
it substantively but the concerns you did express in public comments and in
these meetings that we've been able to address them in a way that works for
everybody, so. Anyway thank you guys for that.
Dennis Chang:

Go ahead (Fabian). (Fabian).

(Fabian):

Oh, thanks Dennis. Sorry. I was muted. So I was speaking to Bullet 8 here,
which is for the billing contacts and then name or the (key) per the table that's
here.
Then finally or sorry, I'm sorry. We - this one is for the - let me catch up here.
So that's the - an additional (footer) that needs to be put before the (end
footer).
Number 10. That's for a number of things to address the situation of gTLDs
that have specific provision in their agreement allowing them to provide a sort
of a (third) access or we're wrote in here redacted RDDS output. So that is an
output that may not contain the full Whois information depending on where
the request comes from and how it's provided.
And so here in this case we describe specifically what those - what the
implementation here means to these registries. And for instance, right now we
have the (unintelligible) name. They are subject to search provision. And so
we're suggesting - so we're clarifying here that in this case the fields listed
here may be treated as optional.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 10

Then 11 we're clarifying what the field registry (in the meantime) doing,
registrant (ID) refer to. Twelve. This is a reference to the RDAP operational
profile, which the implementation of which is needed and required for all the
(gTLD) registries and others to achieve the consistency of Whois RDS output
and that the synchronization that we've worked consistently with over the last
year or so in terms of implementing consistent labeling and display.
And finally Number 13. Here that's for the clarification that additional RDDS
fields may be - it's possible at the end of the output - the current specification
of the output with some restriction as to what does (keyed in) values mean
must not contain.
And finally our effective date of 1 February 2017. We've a clarification that
for the registry operators (unintelligible). This effective date is not the one by
which this should implement consistent labeling and display and they will they would implement consistent labeling and display when we reach the
policy effective date of the transition (unintelligible).
So this completes our presentation of the policy part of the language and our
specific issues of the output for registry RDDS. Let me stop here and see if
there is any questions or comment before we move on to our - right to the
document.
Dennis Chang:

Go ahead.

Steve Metalitz:

Yes. Thank you. Steve Metalitz. Thank you (Fabian). I had one question about
Number 13 in the phrase confidential information issues there. Is that defined
anywhere in this document?

(Fabian):

It is not defined in the document. That I can (confirm).

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 11

Steve Metalitz:

So is it clear what that covers? I mean this is about - this is about additional
fields that a registry operator may choose to provide. And it's not clear to me
what this restricts. I think I understand the first one. The third is kind of a
general one. So that's obviously, you know, that's more of a retrospective one
if something happens I guess.
And but the second one - for example, if a registry operator were to provide a
(who was) service and provide information on past registrants of the same
domain name, would that be considered confidential information even if it's
personally identifiable information? It's just not clear to me what that means.

Francisco Arias: This is Francisco Arias from staff. Steve, this is in - this was added in
response to a request from -- I can't remember who it was -- in the (activity
tech) mailing list.
I think this came up in the context of the RDAP profile but it also applies in
the Whois side. And there was a concern about language in the profile about
the need to request permission from ICANN to add a RDS field.
So we're saying it's okay to add them but you have to use a contact (but) have
to make sure that you are not adding any - security will now read in what you
are doing. You have to be careful in what you are adding.
And we also - if you look at the last sentence in Number 13, what else can
they - (they are ready to) provide us with the list of (relational fields) to
ICANN before they deploy them so we can have -- how do you say -- a time
check just in case we did something that may raise an issue so we can deal
with the registry before they're deployed.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 12

(Jeff):

Thanks. (Jeff) (unintelligible) here. So my question is also on 13. I also - first
I had that same question on the confidential information. But I guess reading
this it seems like it says that it -- where was it -- that without further approval
by ICANN but then it says prior to deployment registry operators shall
provide an update to the list of all the additional fields supported to ICANN.
So it seems like it's a tacit approval, right, if ICANN doesn't say anything? It's
still approval but you're saying you don't need to get explicit approval from
ICANN. But it's still basically approval because you can come back and say
no, those fields cannot be in there. Is that correct?

Francisco Arias: This is Francisco Arias from staff. So we don't see this as an approval (rather
than) - and we don't expect there to be an issue. But it's, like I said, just a
sanity check just to make sure that if let's say someone worked (one and) it
would be a very silly example (with) field that says give me here your user ID
and password for your banking account.
And so I wanted to (put that). They would say oh, are you sure you want to do
that. You know, it's that kind of a filter but we don't expect we'll get to be there to be an issue.
(Jeff):

Okay. Thanks.

Dennis Chang:

We have a question from the room. It's from Chris Pelling. I know just by
fluke the page where we provide information to the registry I did not see a (I
missed) reseller information being a reseller centric registrar similar to (CO)
(unintelligible). This would be a field where we need to populate. Was it me
or I just missed it? I apologize for that mispronunciation.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 13

Francisco Arias: This is Francisco Arias. Oh, that's (Fabian). (Fabian) is (coming up). Reseller
(field) in there for - oh, that's the value. It is showing where it will appear.
Number 2 is mentioned that this is an optional field. This is coming from the
2013 RAA with reseller as an optional field. So we are replicating this in the
(unintelligible).
Dennis Chang:

Go ahead (Roger).

(Roger):

This is (Roger). On Number 9 it looks like the URL for the registry is
different than the registrar. This is different than what we're required to show.

Francisco Arias: Let us check on that.
Dennis Chang:

Thank you. Go ahead Joe.

Joe Waldron:

Yes. Joe Waldron from VeriSign. So I have two points. One I think just for
clarification. I'm trying to get to the footnote - the footnote at the end of the
first section. Since we defined yesterday that there were really two effective
dates, I think we should just be clear there's an effective date in the chart that
you showed yesterday that had an effective date for new registrations versus
the (backflow) of legacy.
If I remember - if I remember that chart correct - the Gantt chart with the
timeline slide. (You don't) - okay.

Dennis Chang:

I think you're referring to transition.

Joe Waldron:

Transition. Yes. There was a slide - the transitional implementation path. So
there's a policy effective date for new registrations and a policy effective date
for existing registrations. So since there's two different dates, I think it's just

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 14

ambiguous in the policy document that we just sent out in terms of which one
or how is that being implemented. So I think we should just make that
clarification.
Dennis Chang:

Yes.

((Crosstalk))
Dennis Chang:

No, go ahead if you want to address that first.

Francisco Arias: Yes. So very quickly. This is Francisco by the way. This slide is about the
transition from thin to thick. The effective date that we're showing in the
document is only about consistent labeling and display, which is you could
say a tier policy effective date, different to these two.
So that effective date is being shown in the screen it's only about consistent
labeling and display. It's not about the transition from thin to thick. Does that
make sense?
Joe Waldron:

I'm referring to the footnote at the bottom. It says registry operators for
(comment and jobs) shall be subject to this policy upon the policy effective
date for the transition from thin to thick.

Francisco Arias: Oh.
Joe Waldron:

I'm just saying that that's ambiguous.

Francisco Arias: Understood. Yes. Thank you. We probably should make clear that for - that
this is what you're doing two effective dates for (unintelligible) would be the
effective date for (unintelligible) would be the other date. Yes, we need to…

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 15

Joe Waldron:

I would say let's have a discussion about how we want to clarify this statement
then. I don't know that you want to be in this limbo land. But we - we'll have
to figure out what the right clarification is.
And then the other question I had was on the - on Number 12 with the RDAP
service. And I'm just - maybe I haven't been keeping up on the RDAP profile
but I guess I just have - I still have some concerns with including the language
that we have to - that this is going to mandate implementation of the RDAP
operational profile.
And I know when we had the session in Marrakech, I think for instance (they)
made the comment that the profile is really just documenting existing
requirements and specifications.
So I guess without knowing what the status of that document and saying that
we're, you know, we're going to review this and having that profile that hasn't
been really finalized I don't believe and still is in progress, I think that leaves
an uncertainty at this point.

Francisco Arias: I'll take further questions Joe. This is Francisco. And - so as you may
remember, we - a long time ago they estimate the decision to bundle the
implementation of both RDAP and (CLD). So we're still with that. And I - the
team to send the updated version of the outlook profile. It's almost finalized
and it should - I expect to send it today.
And it's a updated version like this one and incorporating the feedback we
received in the public comments. There are many (unintelligible) but there are
some clarifications that were requested by the community and we are doing
that. So the idea would be to put those in a synchronized form.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 16

Joe Waldron:

Yes. Thanks Francisco. I think that, you know, look - you have to look at the
two documents together, right. So I think that like part of the dependency on
being comfortable with the RDAP language here, so.

Francisco Arias: Yes.
Joe Waldron:

Absolutely agree. We wanted to make sure that we weren't duplicating and
doing repetitive work. So appreciate the work to try to get this done and just
make it a point that we need to look at them in coordination with each other.

Francisco Arias: Yes Joe. You will see that. Go ahead (Jordan).
(Jordan Shantry): Staying on the - it's (Jordan Shantry) with Google. Staying on the topics of
RDAP for a moment. I think there has been discussion of allowing registry
operators to run a separate instance of RDAP or something like that alongside
the one (running) the official operational profile to get some operational
experience with some of the other features of RDAP.
That doesn't seem to be reflected here. Is there a plan to specifically allow
registry operators to do that somewhere else?
Francisco Arias: Thank you (Jordan). This is Francisco. Yes. The language is going to be
included in the profile. And looks that we are (going) to share it and my goal
is to share it today. And there you will find language that is allowing a
contracted party (registry) operator to operationally run a test out of
(unintelligible) separated from the production service.
(Jordan Shantry): Just as a - is there a reason why that belongs in the RDAP profile as opposed
to in the - in this policy? It seems like the profile as I understood it previously

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 17

was describing the behavior of the sort of production RDAP instance whereas
here we're talking about like oh, and you can have another thing where you
can do whatever you want, right.
And it just feels like that - normally I would think that that would go into
something like Attachment A to the registry agreement. I don't know what the
equivalent on the registrar side is. But having it in the policy itself seems like
it would also be enabling for registrar - registries/registrars whereas here - but
are you just trying to do that so the registrars also have the option or is there
another reason?
Francisco Arias: This is Francisco. Yes. Indeed that's the exact reason why we are planning to
put it in the profile because this policy applies only to registries while the
profile applies to both.
Dennis Chang:

Any other questions, comments? (Fabian), I don't hear any more questions or
comments from here in the room and I don't see any in the chat. So then are
we okay to move on to the next topic? Request to the IRT is to provide their
final comments by next week I think. We'll share that date. It's on the slide
that's coming up. Go ahead (Fabian). You want to share the implementation
notes now?

(Fabian):

Yes. Just wanted to (show those modes) and in particular Number 1, which is
the reference to the advisory. And then Number 2, which is the output that we
provide for unintended purposes, the example output.
And so that I'll put a bit in to reflect obviously what we are requiring as far as
this policy. And that's pretty much it for - as for our document. They need the
background so we'll need that for the IRT to read when they're - (at their own
mark).

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 18

So I think that if there isn't any - if there isn't any comments or question on the
implementation, we can certainly move on.
Dennis Chang:

Let's move on. Let move on to the next topic (Fabian).

(Fabian):

So this is a reminder of the timeline of our next steps. We're requested that the
IRT members provide their feedback, their review to the other (unintelligible)
next week.
We would then work to announce the policy effective date by the end of the
month of July as we mentioned or an effective date of 1 February 2017. If
there isn't any question or comment, we can move on to discussing the
(transition).

Dennis Chang:

One question here.

(Jeff):

(Jeff) (unintelligible) here. So on the deadline for the EU it says by the IRT.
Does that mean it is not open to comments or any other language before - by
anybody else besides members of the IRT?

(Fabian):

So thank you (Jeff) for your question. I think we are at a state where the first
draft was submitted for public comment. We - I believe that our document
here addresses those comments. We are checking with the IRT that (this is
indeed) that they share this analysis. And, you know, unless there is a strong
case for this needing to go through public comment, we intend to move
forward with this document provided the IRT agrees with our analysis.

(Jeff):

Okay. Thanks.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 19

Dennis Chang:

Go ahead.

(Roger):

This is (Roger). On the date. I don't believe the IRT is meeting between now
and then. Do we want the team to meet and address any comments before?
We're giving everybody a week to talk - ready it. I mean should we meet
before?

(Fabian):

So (Roger), I think we were not going to schedule a meeting of the IRT next
week because it's so close to the meeting and travels. But if the IRT thinks we
should have one, we can certainly look into it.
What we were thinking is that we'd have a meeting the following week so in
terms of dates, that would be on the 12th where we would discuss any
feedback we'd receive from the IRT. But so (Roger), what's your preference?

(Roger):

This is (Roger). No. I think that as long as we're talking about it before we say
it's final, I think that's good.

Dennis Chang:

Yes. Our intention was to collect all your last comments and incorporate it and
present to you the final version for one more look as a team. Go ahead Joe.

Joe Waldron:

Yes. Thanks. This is Joe. So I'm just going to say that the 8th is pretty
aggressive knowing that people are traveling back. We've got at least in the
U.S. a long weekend coming. So it's a short week. And I don't want to put
Francisco, you know, under the gun here.
But, you know, having to compare the two different documents I just think it the 8th is aggressive. I think we can try to meet that but I think - I just want to
get some caveats that there may be extenuating circumstances.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 20

Dennis Chang:

Understood. Yes. That's our target date. We're trying to meet the 31 July. So
you know that there is a couple of weeks between those times.

Krista Papac:

Thanks Dennis. Krista Papac. Yes. Just to kind of build on that a little bit. So
knowing it's a little aggressive. But to Dennis' point, we've made a
commitment to you guys to try and give you more predictability and sort of
regular scheduling for implementation work. So that's why we're trying to
meet the 31 July deadline because that's a promise we made to you guys, one.
Two, once we all - IRT and the staff are in agreement, there's still a number of
things we have to do to get the notification out to the contracted parties, et
cetera, so.
Everything you can do to try and meet the deadline would be very much
appreciated. I know you will. I just wanted to make sure you guys understood
sort of the logic behind why we're really pushing. So thank you.

Dennis Chang:

Thank you. (Fabian), go on. Let's go to the next topic.

(Fabian):

So yes. Let me go back to GNSO. We're working through the discussion of
the transition (unintelligible). And so let's start with the notification of the
GNSO in relation to the Recommendation Number 3 we discussed yesterday
Dennis.

Dennis Chang:

Yes. We discussed this yesterday and the process that we would like to use is
that we're fortunate to have a GNSO Council liaison on this IRT. Right.
(Amar) is it?

Woman:

(Amir).

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 21

Dennis Chang:

(Amir), okay. (Amar), (Amir). He's not here. But I think his charter for duty to
have that liaison. So what we would like to do is use that. And so I know that
Joe, you know, you kind of volunteered to maybe draft something so we're
going to take you up on that.
So what we'd like to do is maybe have you draft something and circulate it
within the IRT. And then perhaps if you guys will agree then have (Amar)
liaise with (Janice) from counsel. Go ahead, (Steve).

(Steve Metalitz): Thank you. (Steve Metalitz). For the benefit of those of us who were not here
yesterday because we had conflicts with this meeting and because the agenda
for that meeting was distributed less than 48 hours in advance in violation of
Icann policy, what are you talking about? What is this request?
(Joe):

Yes, this is (Joe). So what I brought up was an issue that really goes back to
the original charter in the legal review that was done by Icann staff looking at
the privacy and PII issues, which one of the outcomes of that paper essentially
said that registries and registrars should do their own analysis.
As we've been conducting that analysis and as we've seen some of the changes
with the EU privacy laws, we've seen other jurisdictions begin enforcement of
rules that talk about like in Russia I think on September 1st the data for
Russian citizens -- I'm not sure what data that includes. I haven't read the law
myself -- but is required to be maintained on servers within the country. So as
you start seeing some of those changes, one of the -- I can go back and re-read
the exact language, but there is a note in Task 3 to the charter for the IRT that
if we identify any issues related to privacy that were not addressed by the
working group, that we should notify the GNSO.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 22

So it's just the notification going back to the GNSO to make them aware of
those issues that we want them to call to their attention.
Dennis Chang:

Yes, furthermore what we discussed yesterday -- and this was just brought up
yesterday and is that if a notification and we are going to do that, but the IRT
agrees to move on with our work, and it's up to the counsel to take action if
they should wish to. So that's …

(Steve Metalitz): Thank you for that explanation. So there will be a draft of this notification
circulated before it goes?
Dennis Chang:

Absolutely.

(Steve Metalitz): Okay. Thank you. And just to be clear, there is no expectation this would
change any of the timeline that was set out in the last scorecard as far as the
transition, is that correct?
Dennis Chang:

Again, correct.

(Joe):

So I think the issue that I brought up was that it's essentially - I believe it's an
obligation to us to provide that notice based on the way the language is written
in the Task 3.

Dennis Chang:

Okay. Let's continue. Time for timeline discussion and (Steve) since you
weren't here, maybe I'll give a little bit more time to explain what this is for
those who were not here yesterday.

Man 3:

Sure. Thanks (Dennis). So what you're seeing here in this slide is a summary an attempt by us at summarizing what we've heard so far in the conversation
of the IRT regarding the transition path for the transition. So we've

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 23

represented in this slide the true timeline for new registration and existing
registration starting - that timeline is (unintelligible) announcement of the
policy effective date in January 2017.
And from there we decide to lay out what we've understood would be the stuff
and the timeframes involved. So regarding new registration, we understood
that the registry is needed to make changes and revise those changes so that
we thought six months was consistent with what was discussed. At that time
registrars would be able to optionally create new registration with the thick
model and they have had six months to prepare and six more months to
transition all their new registrations and for all registrars to transition their
new registration (unintelligible).
And then at the end of those 12 months in 2018 registry will require thick
registration from new registration and that's the time at which the policy
would be effective for new registration. So that’s for the first half. And the
second half -- existing registration -- here we have those six months we
discussed for the registries to prepare and notify and then the mediation month
that was discussed and requested by registrars to complete those transitions of
existing registration under the terms that have been discussed so far. The
limited valuation rules.
And so that would create another policy effective date for existing
registration. Let me very quickly mention that yesterday in the discussion
there was a comment by (Jody) that the expectation was that the 18 months for
existing registration would start after the registry has had a time to make the
changes and announce them. So this was the request from yesterday and I
show again our slide - our previous slide, sorry.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 24

So that was our summary. The 18 months for existing registration would start
right away. When (Jody) was suggesting that those 18 months start when
registry was actually ready to take registration or to pick up existing
registration data.
Let me stop here. This is what we would like to continue our discussion and
understand whether that's everyone's understanding or if that seems - that
indeed seems reasonable for everyone in the IRT.
(Steve Metalitz): This is (Steve Metalitz). I was not here obviously for the discussion yesterday,
so I'll have to go back and check that. But I am not - I would not support what
is in effect delaying the transition from thin to thick for an additional six
months in the lower left-hand corner of this slide. I don't know. I feel like
we've discussed this over the last several weeks in great detail and so I don't
understand why at this stage an additional six months is being asked for.
Just to kind of look at this from a slightly broader perspective. I think this
policy effective date of January 2019 means that it will take longer to do the
transition from thin to thick that it took the United States to land a man on the
moon in the 1960s. It took longer than World War II. It is seven years,
basically. And I don't understand why that would be necessary. So I'll be
happy to go back and look at the transcript or maybe people can you know, I
don't want to ask people to repeat their arguments from yesterday but I would
be opposed to this.
Dennis Chang:

Yes, just to clarify (Steve). Yesterday we started a conversation but we ran out
of time and we all agreed to come back this morning and continue the
conversation so it's perfectly okay to ask for clarifying questions and have this
dialogue and discussion. Now (Jody) is online and I would like to give (Jody)
an opportunity to speak. Go ahead.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 25

Man 2:

Hi. First of all, can everyone hear me?

Dennis Chang:

Very clear.

Man 2:

All right great. It was always my understanding, (Steve), first of all to your
question. Delaying it by six months - it has been my understanding that the
registrars would be given 18 months after the registries have implemented and
were in production. I didn't realize that we were overlapping the six months of
preparation for them for the registries with their 18 months that the registries
were going to be - or registrars were given to basically transition this data.
To your point, you're talking about seven years since we've started. I'm not
sure when it started - if it started seven years ago. If you're trying to spend all
this time down to make it less than what World War II was, I think then we
should be done already I guess. We can't take 46 million records for
(unintelligible) and get them done in a one-month period or a six-month
period. The reason we're asking for 18 months is because there is a lot of data
that needs to go over there. We will start the transition as soon as we can and
we want that extra - it's not like we're asking for to start implementation
extending 18 months over that 18-month period.
It's going to be a lot of data that needs to be moved over there so we're asking
for a cushion in case there's any kind of issues that we have, either a
placement on those scalabilities - not scalabilities, but just a monotrack that
we're going to create at the registry and the amount of data that we need to
have in addition to the registry. It's quite a lot of data.
We went through this once before at (unintelligible) and I know (Joe) was
there. I think you have better numbers than I remember, or more concrete. But

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 26

at the time that we moved that over from thin to thick, I think that was 12
years ago. Go Daddy had I believe it was 600,000 registrations and I think dot
org is only about 1.8 million or two or three million. It was a small number
compared to dot com. So it took a very long time to get that (unintelligible) in
fact it was years after we started the transition, but we were still getting the
warnings from the dot org operator that our contact information was incorrect
and most of that had been from transfers (unintelligible) that had transferred
into us years after the transition.
Now we're talking about a scalability that is between 50 and 100 times greater
than what dot org was at the time.
Man 1:

(Pio).

(Pio):

Hello everybody. This is (Pio). (Jody) just actually covered what I was going
to touch upon and let me add to that 18 months - six months - this is taking
indeed quite some time. But on the other hand, we have to realize we still
have a working system here so from my point of view, if there is any extra
time required let's take that time and make sure this thing gets done in a
correct manner. And like I said just a few before, we have a working system
now. Thanks.

Joe:

Yes, this is (Joe). So I just wanted to kind of echo the stats that (Jody) gave
that when the dot org transition occurred -- and I think we've talked about this
a number of times in the PDP and so on -- it was a long time ago. The systems
were less complicated. We didn't have (DNSEC), we didn't have IPv6, but at
that time there were little over a million-and-a-half registrations in dot org.
There were 98 registrars of which 92 successfully migrated. I don't know what
happened to the four - if I did that math right - six.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 27

Public math. Not my strong suit. And I believe that transition was done
incrementally kind of on a registrar by registrar basis. I think there are people
from the registrars that still remember going through that like Jody. But it took
more than a year to just go through the initial transition for those registrars at
that time.
So I think that when you look at all of the other competing opportunities and
initiatives that everyone's got, you know, I think that 18 months is a
reasonable expectation. It also allows to coordinate the activity with the
normal lifecycle engagements that registrars have with their registrant.
(Steve Metalitz): (Steve Metalitz) again. Yes, I appreciate the scalability issues. We had
discussed this over the several meetings about 18 months and I'm not going to
engage in public math either here, but maybe we can put something in later. I
mean, 18 months - it is obviously is a large number of transactions that will be
needed and even if 30 transactions per second is not going to, you know - 18
months provides a great deal of cushion.
And I note that Verisign offered as I understand it an alternative method
which would allow for approximately -- with a lot of caveats -- 80
transactions per second. In other words, three times as fast. Almost three times
as fast. So that again means I think that the 18 months is ample.
My concern was that did we just forget about this first six months or you
know, this issue of overlap versus running in parallel. Was that just an error
for the last several weeks/months we've been looking at a timeline that didn't
have the six months during which time registrars would not be transitioning?
And how we have to add that in at the beginning, thereby pushing the end date
out into 2019. Why was that not in there before?

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 28

Again, while we've had this discussion about 18 months and I understand the
reasons that are being put forward for it, but it's now become 24 months.
(Krista Papek):

Hey, (Steve), it's (Krista Papek) from Icann staff. So my understanding from
the staff perspective is we have been talking about 18 months for a while now.
And we've been presenting it without this other - you know, thanks (Fabian).
So good with these slides. It's been looking like this I think what I heard
yesterday was registrars were thinking they have 18 months to implement.
Meaning when they heard 18 months, they were hearing once we have
everything we need from the registry operator we then have 18 months to
implement and on the registry side of it they're saying well, we need time to
build that in order to give it to you.
So I think there was a disconnect. I don't think it was a deliberate disconnect. I
think people are thinking of this from the chair that they sit in -- the registrar
chair -- the registry chair -- and I think there was general consensus in the
room that it was 18 months but when that 18 months began is where I think a
little bit of the disconnect was.

(Rich Morgan):

Hi, (Rich Morgan) here from Go Daddy and I'm coming in as an observer into
this and have not been part of these earlier discussions, but looking at this
slide I would have called out that it's interesting that there are six months for
both registries and registrars to prepare and during that preparation period, we
somehow have an overlap of the actual execution of that. And it seems that it
would have been an error not to have them be a critical path of 24 months.
Just as an observer and seeing from the outside.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 29

(Rich Morgan) again. Using the World War II analogy, it's saying lets prepare
for the landing and send the men now. And can't do them both at the same
time.
Man 1:

(Steve)?

(Steve Metalitz): This is (Steve) again. I do see the overlap under new registration, so that's not
a problem. You can be - while the registries are updating you can transition
your new registrations from thin to thick.
(Rich Morgan):

This is (Rich) again. I'm just speaking specifically about the one element. I'm
not talking about the other.

(Steve Metalitz): Okay. Well, I guess that's my question is why the overlap can't exist in both
but …
(Joe Weldon):

This is (Joe Weldon) from Verisign. So I think we're looking at - I guess that's
orange. The 12-month and 18-month bars and drawing interpretations on what
that means. So registrars aren't doing nothing during the time that the registry
is updating the system right? During that time you know, we're producing
documentation so that the registrars can build their systems. We're delivering
an (OT&E) environment so that registrars can connect and test and make sure
that systems are working correctly.
So that's what's happening where the six-month and 12-month period overlap
and then we open the production system where you see that diamond called
Optional Thick. That begins a period that registrars have a period to migrate
their production systems and begin doing new registrations.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 30

So I think we were making the assumption that you know, similar activity is
going on in the bottom portion for existing registrations, where that 18-month
bar represented a combination of the preparation work as well as the execution
and production.
And I think that was what caused the question to say what we really need for
the production execution of transitioning the, you know, in a number of
registrar's cases tens of millions of domain names over - they needed 18
months' worth of execution time.
So I think that it's a little bit of interpretation of what those bars were
representing.
Man 1:

Continuing with maybe looking at these slides and interpreting it the same
way, I'd like to ask a question. Should the registrar ready and willing to
transition, they can do so in August of 2017. Is that correct? Should the
registrar be ready and willing to transition the data, they can do so in August
of 2017. That's the first time and earliest they could do it, correct? Go ahead,
(Jody).

Man 2:

Well, that's my understanding, is that we could start in August 2017. Taking
new registration. Or providing new registrations with contact data. And we
could also start the existing transition from thin to thick for existing
registrations.
But to (Steve)'s point, I was also going to ask a question on the first timeline
there. At the end of that 12 months for registration - I'm sorry - new
registrations from thin to thick, what is the contact data validation
requirements that time? Is it still only the three validations that we're requiring

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 31

when we're doing the (unintelligible)? And then talking about contact ID, (op)
code and (unintelligible) email but I'm not sure.
Woman 1:

(Joe) I think that might be a question for you. I heard (Mark) for what it's
worth, I heard (Mark Anderson).

Man 3:

Yes, (Mark), you want to jump in on that?

(Mark Anderson): Yes, this is (Mark). Can you hear me okay?
Man 3:

Yes.

(Mark Anderson): Okay great. (Jody), to answer your question the proposed contact validation is
the reduced contact validation would have to stay in effect for the entire
period of the existing registrations timeline. So from the system perspective,
right? A contact that's created for new registrations and a contact that's created
for existing registrations looks no different. In fact, you could use one for both
right?
So from a system perspective we have no way to differentiate the two. So we
would need to keep the (unintelligible) rule in effect for you know, the entire
18-month period that's in place for existing registrations to migrate. Thank
you.
(Dennis Chang): So this is (Dennis Chang). Just for clarity, and I think when the IRT were
having a discussion of 12 to 18 month range, I think that was a cause of
confusion when what we should have been talking about was from the point
of announcement to the effective date, to effectively what we're looking at
here is a 24-month correct? Everybody agree? And from what (Mark) said that
the reduced validation rule would stay in effect for two years no?

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 32

Man 2:

This is (Joe). So the first time that anyone would be able to begin updating
data would be at the beginning of Optional Thick which would support new
registrations as well as backfill any existing registrations. But really, it really
is just that 18-month period that the reduced validations would be in effect.

Man 1:

Good point. (Jody) go ahead.

Man 3:

What I was going to add - thank you (Mark). That makes sense to me that we
would have a reduced contact validation until the end of the existing
registration or until existing registrations are completed. At that time - and I
guess what I'm curious about what we would be talking - at the end of existing
registration when they've all been completed, is that when the new contact
validation or contact requirements I guess be required by the registry? Is that
when we plan to implement them? Is that February 1st, 2019, then or
(unintelligible) registration?

Man 1:

(Mark), I see a nod from (Joe) here. Do you want to answer that question?

Man 2:

I'm nodding too. I guess you can't tell. But yes, I think my understanding is
the discussions we've had within the RRC is that yes, on that policy effective
date for existing registration you know, at that time the registries would be
required to switch over to (unintelligible) that their standard validation rules.
Thank you.

Man 1:

Any more questions/comments on the timeline? So, one of the things that I've
been observing and I've been following this IRT for some time now, is that
there's a lot detailed technical discussion. It's almost like design by committee.
So I think there was a little bit of talk at the last IRT meeting maybe we're
getting too detailed in that discussion. So from now on I think our aim is to

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 33

focus on the policy level and once we lock down the agreed-upon days, then
we're just going to push forward and if the registry and registrar needs to have
a detailed discussion on technical exchange, we can maybe do that in another
form. Is everybody okay with that?
(Joe Weldon):

Yes, this is (Joe Weldon) from Verisign. So absolutely what we'll do. You
know, Verisign has done this with registrars a number of times. I mean we'll
kind of go through our standard development process, engage with the
registrars. We'll have our normal communications so I think that you know,
this part of it -- the technical implementation -- should just follow our
standard registry/registrar processes.

(Steve Metalitz): This is (Steve Metalitz) again. I just want to put - you know, remind people of
what the chronology has been here. This policy was adopted by the Icann
Board on February 7, 2014. So we're now talking about five years to
implement this policy from the time it was adopted. A final report from the
Policy Development Process Working Group which most of the people on this
IRT had some involvement in was October 2013. The policy development
process started in March 2012 - that's seven years. An issue report was issued
in September 2011 - seven-and-a-half years.
So I understand that this is a big change in just in volume. It is again a
transition of a major legacy GTLD registry did occur in far less time, 12 years
ago. I understand that it was probably not 100% perfect and there were some
registrars level behind perhaps if the math is right. But basically it was able to
happen then, so I'm just going to - I just want to make sure that we're all aware
of the pace that we are now seem to be prepared to endorse here. Thank you.
(Fred Aguimeaux):

(Fred Aguimeaux). Yes, I agree that it should be a bit faster at some point,

because I mean I think we have already agreed on the policy and I think we

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 34

should be in the details now - maybe more into the details and get ready to
implement. Because the sooner it is finished, well the better it is for
(unintelligible) so we can then work on other things. So yes, I think we really
should go into the details and consider maybe the policy is locked on that but
try to make more decisions.
(Steve DelBianco):

Hey this is (Steve DelBianco) with Business Constituency. To (Steve

Metalitz)'s point, when something goes on this long it's always a significant
risk that externalities change the circumstances. In the DC in our comments
we were well aware that changes in data localization laws which are
extremely unfortunate and damaging to ecommerce and DC members and also
changes to data privacy laws have the potential to impact how we do what we
do - not when we do it, right? But how we do what we do in terms of
migrating data.
So I wasn't here yesterday. So I'm unaware as to whether all of these plans
anticipate that some data may not be allowed to be ported and transported
across borders, particularly of personal information. Is that just something we
assume registrars or registries and their lawyers and law firms - that they'll
just work that out and so we're not explicitly dealing with it at all?
But it does imply we have to have a certain flexibility as to what the ultimate
solution may have to look like, where you just can't move these 2 million
records to the United States because it would be against the law.
Man 2:

Thanks, (Steve). This is (Joe). You bring up a good point and I think that's
kind of the reason that we talked about this letter that we're going to provide
to the GNSO is to call that out.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 35

Early on in the IRT work (Fabian) had a slide that he had showed addressing
this exact scenario. We talked about waivers where there is a waiver process
within Icann to address that situation. And we had I guess an (RDEP) based to
work around solution that was something considered early on.
So I think it is something that we've addressed and considered. This is really
kind of the standard case of what we're talking about in terms of how we're
implementing the registrations and the backfill. So I think it is a good point
and it is something that we've addressed - probably not in the extent of the
detail that we've talked about for kind of the standard case, though.
(Steve DelBianco):

If I could follow up - I would need to know the details but we would let

them have (Steve Metalitz) revisit the situation in six months where now
we've discovered that these data location and privacy laws are going to further
extend the timeline.
So I'm just asking if everyone is fully aware of those limitations as you design
your solution so that the timelines incorporate the technical people at the
registries and registrars with their legal people and given that challenging
legal environment, these timelines are still doable. We wouldn't want to come
in and say well, given the new legal environment we need to change the
timeline.
Man 2:

(Joe), I'll follow up again. We'll have a private discussion - no. That's exactly
right and this is why I think early on when we first started this group up, a lot
of the people sitting at the table today weren't here.
And I think there was a concerted effort by Icann staff and others to get more
participation so I think it's important that we have registrars here because
registrars are the ones that have to comply with their local laws as well as

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 36

registries and that's why I think it is important that we provide this letter back
to the GNSO because you know, it's not just Comnet and Jobs - it's not just the
registries that Verisign is operating that have this issue with the privacy data.
It's really all of the GTLDs.
So it is an issue I referenced yesterday that this was discussed quite
extensively in the RDS meeting that (Chuck Holms) was hosting, I think it
was on Tuesday. So it is an important point that's being discussed in a number
of different venues you know, throughout the community but I think that you
know, what we're tasked with doing in the IRT is implementing this policy.
(Seth Pio):

Thanks. This is (Seth Pio) from Rules and Register. So (Steve), since I joined
this group I've been talking and mentioning that when we are looking at the
new EU regulations that are coming into effect at some point - it's a moving
target. My plan - and maybe I was a little bit naïve here - when I started this I
was hoping we could have this done before those new EU regulations would
kick in because when I consulted with my lawyers back then, we had no issue.
We saw no issue. Our contracts with our registrants were able to give us the
consent to move the data and we are now looking at this timeline somewhere
next year I assume these new EU regulations will kick in.
And what I heard back from my lawyers back like 14 months ago is that (Pio)
if those new EU regulations kick in, we have no idea if you are compliant or if
you can move the data. So from my perspective as an EU registrar, I cannot
promise you we are not going to fumble with that timeline again because I
basically simply do not know.

((Crosstalk))

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 37

(Seth Pio):

That’s one part of it. Thanks.

(Erika von Eichenbot):

Good morning. (Erika von Eichenbot). Maybe to get some clarity

on this last point. So the legislation will kick in the new regulation in 2018. I
would have to check the exact month but there are two stories to it. The one is
the legislation and the second one is the so-called privacy shield. The privacy
shield is a little bit (unintelligible) ensures the transfer of data under certain
conditions and ensures accuracy between - that there is a certain amount of
accuracy between Europe and the United States with regard how data is
treated is preserved.
Now, the story is it was supposed to be - the agreement was supposed to be
agreed on and the documents to be presented to the public on the 5th of July. I
just had a long discussion yesterday and it's now very likely going to be the
12th of July. They still have some internal quarrels in particular between the
European member states because of some of the issues. They had to do some
final adaptation on certain texts and documents but it seems to go okay.
Which doesn't mean -- and this is the third part of the story -- always keep in
mind the privacy shield can be challenged again in court, but it gives you at
least certainty for a certain period of time before somebody might challenge it
again in court and then we have to find another solution. I can give you more
details. I am happy to send it to somebody who can distribute it about the
timing and the issues. I have a note prepared on this. So I am happy to share
this.
Man 1:

(Steve), did you want to speak?

(Steve Metalitz): And it would be great to have that information from (Erika) on the timeline. I
will just say on the privacy shield my understanding is - or I guess I could ask

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 38

it as a question. Does any of the registries or registrars around this table
currently rely upon or did they rely upon the safe harbor that privacy shield is
replacing to cover the transfer of data to existing thick registries, for example?
I think the answer is no. I don't think that has been an issue, so you know, that
may or may not be relevant in the new environment but I think the fact is as
(Pio) said, people were looking at the existing law and seeing if they seemed
to be compliant and again this was similar to the conclusion that ICANN's
outside counsel reached also in that report that came here a couple years ago
now.
So obviously the landscape is changing in data localization as (Steve) points
out, which is kind of separate from this whole data protection issue. Also is
going to have an impact - that's true. There's nothing we can do about that
outside environment, but of course if we had proceeded on a more expeditious
schedule we would have a system in place now and we'd be able to evaluate
that system against the changing legal environment. Thank you.
(Fred Aguimeaux):

(Fred Aguimeaux). I also wonder, does it mean that at some point we will

stop all the registrations in (unintelligible) like dot info and all the others,
because of this privacy law? I mean there are thousands of registrations every
day and data transferred from Russia to the U.S. and so on and the world is
still running.
So maybe - okay, I'm not a lawyer, but maybe we shouldn't worry that much.
Like if we have one year to do that, maybe some people will renew their
registrations but one of the arguments - one of the thing we said during the
IRT is when they renew they can accept the terms and conditions so they can
accept the transfer. We have plenty of things to ease and to move forward I
think.

ICANN
Coordinator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995678
Page 39

Man 1:

Any more comments? We are beyond the 10:30 mark and I know (Joe), you
had to go. So then I will go ahead and close out this meeting. Thank you
everyone for coming and we will - don't forget our target date, next week
Friday we would love to have your comments and following week we will
have another IRT meeting and hopefully we can hit a couple of those early
milestones. Next week is July 8th, Friday. Thank you. Thank you, everyone.

END

