HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 13:30 to 15:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Ladies and gentlemen, we’re waiting for someone from AFRALO.
We need to have at least one person from each RALO leadership,
so as soon as they come in, we can start.
Good afternoon, everybody. I hope you've all managed to grab
some lunch. Welcome to the At-Large regional leadership
meeting. Some people are still having their lunch. We did have a
very short break at lunch time, and there were some queues
around the convention center to grab sandwiches and so on.
Welcome, everybody, to this afternoon meeting. We have quite a
busy agenda. The first thing that we’re probably going to do is to
quickly go around the table to [inaudible].

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Working? Working?

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Back to work. Apologies for this. For those people following us
remotely, one of the mics was plugged out, so it was not

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

censorship. It’s fine. It’s just a technical problem. You don’t need
to start a revolution or do a Brexit or whatever it is.
Let’s get back to our agenda today. Welcome back, everyone.
We’re going to go around the table to see who is represented at
the table. Let’s start from my far left. Yes, you're the person.
Don’t look behind you. Could you please quickly introduce
yourself and from what RALO you are from or what
organization? Thank you.

DANIEL NANGHAKA:

I’m Daniel Nanghaka from AFRALO.

HUMBERTO CARRASCO:

Humberto Carrasco, LACRALO Chair.

MARITZA AGUERO:

Maritza Aguero, LACRALO Secretariat.

MIKHAIL MEDRISH:

Mikhail Medrish, EURALO Board member.

MICHEL TCHONANG:

Michel Tchonang, member from AFRALO. I come from Africa.

Page 2 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

AZIZ HILALI:

Aziz Hilali, AFRALO Chair.

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

Judith Hellerstein, NARALO Secretary.

WOLF LUDWIG:

Wolf Ludwig, EURALO Secretariat.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Olivier Crepin-Leblond, EURALO Chair.

SILVIA VIVANCO:

Silvia Vivanco, ICANN staff.

DAN O’NEILL:

Dan O’Neill, WBC Global.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Rob Hoggarth, ICANN policy staff.

YESIM NAZLAR:

Yesim Nazlar, ICANN staff.

ARIEL LIANG:

Ariel Liang, ICANN staff.

Page 3 of 66

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

MAUREEN HILYARD:

Maureen Hilyard. I think I’m in the wrong meeting. ALAC.

SIRANUSH VARDANYAN:

Siranush Vardanyan, APRALO Chair.

SATISH BABU:

Satish Babu, APRALO Vice Chair.

BASTIAAN GOSLINGS:

Bastiaan Goslings here on behalf of Internet Society,
Netherlands chapter, an At-Large Structure from the EURALO
region.

KAILI KAN:

Kaili Kan, ALAC.

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

Glenn McKnight, NARALO Chair.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, everyone. Today, the few rules in the
game: usually, if you want to speak, you can put your card up, or
if you don’t have a card, just wave at me and you'll be put in the
queue. We have people also following us remotely, and we have

Page 4 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

interpretation, so please say your name before you speak for the
transcript and for the interpretation. Don’t speak too fast. I have
to be reminded of that from time to time. Due to the
interpretation, one is able to speak in English, in French, and in
Spanish. That’s the thing. I don’t think I’ve missed anything.
The first thing we need to do is to approve the agenda today. We
will start speaking to Dan O’Neill and to Rob Hoggarth about the
document development pilot program. Then we’ll be looking at
some of the ATLAS II, At-Large Summit II recommendations.
After that, we’ll look at the multi-year planning of At-Large faceto-face meetings, the Fiscal Year 17 special requests for the
regional At-Large organizations, the At-Large review and the
impact on the regional At-Large organizations. Hopefully by
then, Holly will be able to make it here, and Cheryl Langdon-Orr
also should be joining us. We will have any other business, if we
still have time, speaking about the metrics. We have to do all of
this in – is it 90 minutes? Yeah, 90 minutes, so no pressure.
Is the agenda adopted, or are there any modifications to be
done? Seeing no hands being put up and nobody objecting, the
agenda is adopted. We have regional representation from all of
the RALOs present in the room. We can swiftly move on to
number two, the document development pilot program with
Dan O’Neill and with Rob Hoggarth.

Page 5 of 66

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

I invite you to have a look at the ATLAS II recommendation
number 30. The ATLAS was the At-Large Summit. I know that
many of you here did not attend the At-Large Summit, since you
are more recently accredited At-Large Structures, but this was a
meeting that took place in London. I would say it’s two years ago
already, two years ago where all of the At-Large Structures met
face-to-face. They worked an enormous amount to come up
with a set of recommendations to be implemented, not only by
the Board, but also by the At-Large community, by the different
regional At-Large organizations.
One of these recommendations is number 30. We will be
speaking about some of the other recommendations afterwards.
Once the document was produced, passed on to the Board after
full ratification by the ALAC, the community continued its work
with

an

implementation

taskforce

and

sent

these

recommendations to the various At-Large working groups to
further the implementation to try and see what we make of
them.
This one that we have in front of us mentioned the following
thing. It says, “For each public comment process, SOs and ACs” –
which by now you would have hopefully understood to be
supporting organizations and advisory committees – “should be
adequately resourced to produce impact statements.”

Page 6 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

That’s one of the problems of our community. There’s a whole
amount of notes underneath that. One of the problems is the
fact that a lot of ICANN work is filled with acronyms, might not
be seen as something that really relates to end users, and is
quite complex, as well.
Impact statements. How does it impact on our users? And
explanatory notes as to why we should care about this are
something that was found to be really needed. Thankfully,
ICANN have listened to us. We were quite shocked, I would say,
to hear from Rob Hoggarth, who is the Senior Director for Policy
and Community Engagement, that something was in the works
in his department to be able to perhaps go some step along the
way to help our community in being able to understand those
issues.
Without any further ado, I’ll hand you over to Rob Hoggarth.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you very much, Olivier. Good afternoon, everyone. Very
good to see everyone again. The last time that a number of us
got together, I think it was a smaller group. We spoke in
Marrakech. The purpose of the conversation was to share with
you some advancements, as Olivier mentioned, that we had
been able to make with respect to recommendation 30,
although it was introduced in a different context.

Page 7 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

It was a conversation about producing a capability on a pilot
basis of being able to assist members of the ICANN community,
different community groups, in being able to prepare comments
or statements, primarily in the context of the public comment
arena, but potentially in other ways, as well. We spent a good
period of time with a number of the leaders and the secretariats
at a special meeting in Marrakech, exploring with you some of
your insights, perspectives, backgrounds as to what types of
resources would be of value to you in the production of
documentation.
We took some of the information that we got from you and from
others, basically went back to the drawing board and are
reporting to you our progress today, including I think some news
that will be welcome in terms of the initiation of this effort.
Essentially, we’ve proceeded in two channels of work. One
channel of work, which is to focus primarily on developing this
concept of issue primers, issue introductions if you will, to
enable all of you, as regional At-Large Structures, to be able to
explain to members of your community the importance of a
particular public comment effort, be able to potentially use that
documentation for recruiting purposes, for educational
purposes, and for research purposes.

Page 8 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

There’s a second channel of the pilot program which features
more direct facilitation from identified individuals who would be
directly connected with a community that was interested in
working together to develop responses to certain public
comment proceedings.
The overall theme that I heard from you all in the Marrakech
discussions were you wanted to focus primarily on the research
and information side first. The facilitation side is great, but it
requires a certain infrastructure on the community’s part, and
with the emphasis that you all had on outreach, bringing new
participants into the process, it was probably better to focus on
the documentation side. Dan and I are going to spend the bulk
of the time today talking about that piece of the program.
Essentially, what we’ve worked through in planning with Dan is
to set aside 20 public comment opportunities over the course of
the next many months in collaboration with all of you to find out
which are the most important proceedings to focus on and begin
over the course of these 20 opportunities to develop a template,
a template that you can use that provides what you need for
research, development, and outreach within your communities.
We’re starting out with the concept of one size fits all. That may
end up not proving to be successful, but we need to start
somewhere. As Olivier regularly comments to me when the topic

Page 9 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

of a pilot comes up, it’s an opportunity to experiment, to be
educated, to learn, to fail fast, and then be able to improve
things.
I’m going to turn over the microphone to Dan to explain a little
bit about the planning process that he’s engaged in, the
outreach that he’s done to identify individuals who are educated
about ICANN, who can work with ICANN staff as well as with
members of your community to start drafting these types of
documents, to get your feedback, to adjust them, fine tune
them, blow them up and start over, but over the course of 20 or
so proceedings, to be able to ultimately focus and provide you
with something that will be of value and achieve many of your
goals.
With that overall introduction, I’ll turn things over to Dan O’Neill
and let him describe in a little bit more detail the work he’s done
and the next steps that we’re going to be engaging in, in
cooperation with all of you. Dan may talk a little bit about how
he’ll collaborate with us on staff, including members of the AtLarge support team. We’ll just then entertain any questions or
any feedback from all of you. Dan, please proceed. Thanks.

DAN O’NEILL:

Thank you very much, Rob, and thank you to all of you for giving
me the opportunity to spend a few minutes introducing the

Page 10 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

document development and drafting pilot program that we have
been working on, as Rob said, very much in response to the
input from the community that this was an area that the
communities were looking for assistance. ICANN staff heard that
message, and we have been working diligently over the last
many months to develop a program that we think is going to be
responsive to your needs and the needs of other communities to
assist in the development of your interaction with drafting
comments for ICANN procedures.
At this point, I would like to identify that I do have one of the
people involved in the program, Emily Taylor, who is actually
going to be doing some of the writing of these primers that Rob
described. She is actually online with us, so when we get to the
question and answer period, I would also welcome any
interaction that you would have with Emily. We have already
had an opportunity with the ALAC support staff with ICANN to
have some discussion, so there’s been an introduction and
exchange of ideas, as well as an understanding of the program.
Just to back up and give a bit of context for the program, as Rob
said, it will involve two pillars, which is the primer activity, which
will be the production of 20 primer documents focused on
requests for comments issued by ICANN. We very much welcome
your input in helping us develop exactly which 20 those are. We
are working currently with ICANN staff again to ensure that the

Page 11 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

online list of upcoming opportunities is up to date. We will be
circulating that out and trying to understand from all of you
exactly what your priorities are because we do wish to identify
amongst those 20 the key opportunities that are of greatest
interest to all of the communities.
That’s where we would like to start with this interaction. Beyond
that, once we identify that, we will certainly be working with all
of the communities to circulate out exactly which ones we have
started on. The more input that we can get from each of your
communities, I think the more valuable it will be in the
document that we’re able to produce.
Again, what we are looking to do is be able to help you utilize
this document however it best suits you to give you a better
understanding of what that opportunity is, what that means,
being able to share that out with your communities in any way
that is most useful to you. At the end of the day, what we are
looking for is greater engagement in the ICANN process with a
better understanding of those opportunities amongst all of your
communities, a heightened level of interest and willingness to
engage more in that entire process.
As Rob said, we have identified 20. We would love to have that
first one be perfect. Again, it is a pilot. I think we understand well
that we are going to develop this as we go along. It’s really a

Page 12 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

pilot on both sides in that you as communities have not engaged
in this process, so it is going to be new on your side. It’s also
going to be new on our side, but I can assure you that Emily and
others that I’ve brought along have been involved in these kind
of pilots before in the Internet governance space. There’s a
willingness and understanding that we want to be flexible. We
want to understand. As Rob says, fail fast, understand what
went wrong, and pick up the pieces and go from there.
What we’re really looking to do over these first five primers is
develop something that can be very, very useful, understand
what is most useful to have included there, what is not,
understand that. As Rob said, we’re looking at something right
now where the analysis is going to be very broad-based. Your
community will be one of many that are going to receive this
same document. It’s going to go out to all of the stakeholder
communities. Whether the analysis and the impact statements
that we focus on are able to cover all of those communities, that
is something that the pilot is going to test. If we find that it’s not,
then we’ll change course and see how best to proceed.
I do want to emphasize that we’ve spoken with your support
team. We are ready to be engaged at all levels of this process.
The more input that you can provide for us, the more feedback
that you can provide for us throughout this process, I think the

Page 13 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

better the outcome is going to be, the more valuable the
outcome is going to be at the end of this process for all of us.
With that, I think I will stop. Again, I do have Emily Taylor, who is
one of our writers for these primers, on the line so that if there
are specific questions that you might have for Emily, please feel
free to direct it towards Emily. Other than that, I think Rob and I
are available to discuss any points in the program that you
might have questions on.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much for this introduction. It sounds like a pretty
interesting resource. I note that Emily is indeed online. I don't
know whether she has the ability to speak. She has been called,
as well.

EMILY TAYLOR:

Hi, Olivier.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Oh, you are there. Excellent.

EMILY TAYLOR:

Page 14 of 66

Hi.

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: We can hear you.

EMILY TAYLOR:

I just wanted to confirm that I am on the line. I’m ready to work
with you all. I’m looking forward to the pilot. Just to emphasize
some of the points that have been made by Rob and also by Dan,
this is an experiment and it will be all the better to have full
engagement and input from the community, which I’m really
looking forward to being part of. I note that there are a couple of
questions and recommendations that have come up from the
chat room, that I could just kick off with, I think both from Glenn
McKnight.
It says, “Very helpful.” Pointed to some resources and good
practices from [Aaron]. Thank you for that. I will definitely check
that out with Dan, and also a question. “What are the 20 policy
primer documents?”
I think that this is one of the works in progress. One of the early
tasks will be to identify with the community suitable projects to
experiment on and to produce these template documents. The
early stage of that is to coordinate with ICANN staff, to make
sure that the list of upcoming public comments is actually
accurate and up to date and then to identify suitable projects to
work on.

Page 15 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

“How does it work and what are the steps?” asks Satish Babu
from the list. I think we’re all going to find that out, learning by
doing, but the first thing to do is to identify at least five initial
projects to kick off from. My personal input in choosing these
would be to try to find ones that have a range of different
audiences or different types so that we can really flex the model
and see whether it’s actually proving useful. We can also see
whether this project of working as a one size fits all really is the
way to go or whether we need to adapt.
With that, I will just conclude these early remarks. I look forward
to your questions and comments. Thank you very much.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Emily. Rob Hoggarth, did you wish to
respond directly to this, or shall we start with the questions?

ROB HOGGARTH:

Let’s go in the queue.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: We’ll go in the queue. Let’s start with Glenn McKnight, please.

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

Great. Thank you so much. This is a great concept, and the devil
is in the details, so can you guys elaborate? How did you select

Page 16 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

the five to start with, and what are the five? I guess it’s a
question of expectations. What do you expect out of this? I
assume it’s a one-year pilot for a timeline. What are your
expectations?

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you. You anticipated some of the statements that I
wanted to make, Glenn, so we’ve coordinated very effectively.
The first five have not been chosen yet. Essentially, Emily and
Dan’s focus here is to work with all of you and with us on the
staff to begin to identify what the numbers would look like.
We’re governed pretty much in the mold that we have to rely on
public comments that are coming out from ICANN. We can’t
make up proceedings. That is one of the limitations on this work.
We’re very interested in input from all of you, and a number of
you did work with Silvia to produce questionnaires and answers
to those that flagged for the list of public comment
opportunities at the time ones that you were interested in.
What’s great about working with you from the regional At-Large
organization perspective is that members of your communities
come from all walks of life within the multistakeholder
community. One of the values of having you a part of this pilot
program is that you will reinforce, I hope, some of the desires of
other communities within ICANN who happen to members of

Page 17 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

your regional organizations or folks that you want to reach out
to.
We’re first somewhat governed within this funnel, Glenn, of the
universe of ICANN public comment opportunities. Then it’s a
matter of saying, “NARALO checked these two boxes. LACRALO
checked those three boxes. AFRALO checked those five boxes,
and if we’re in luck, there’s overlap of some of those.”
Again, this is a pilot program, and Dan and I have had long
conversations about this. The interest is in testing a number of
different options. There may be a couple of these that come out
that only impact a small percentage of people within your
particular region. There may be others that only the registries or
registrars are interested in. It will really depend upon what
comes out.
One of the very critical aspects of this program – and this would
be our ask from all of you – is please identify at least one person
from your regional At-Large organization who is willing to own
this concept within your own community because working with
Silvia and Ariel, our hope is that with Silvia’s leadership, we’ll be
able to have regular calls. When I say we, I mean Dan and Emily
and their colleagues, to get feedback from you, to have
conversations about these types of activities. The pilot will have
much more benefit if we have your input, and your regular input.

Page 18 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

This is not going to be something where we just come back and
report to you at every ICANN meeting. The hope is that you’ll
have monthly conversations.
The specific ask we made of Dan and Emily was, “Give us some
suggestions for what those first five might be.” That will largely,
again, be driven by timing. What’s coming out in the next three
months? We don’t want to wait to start this until December, so
they’re going to pick from some limited options.
I would ask that even if a particular topic isn’t of great interest to
any of you individually, that you still be willing to participate in
the conversations because we’re also looking at what these
documents, or what I say to Dan, documentation looks like. Is it
a one- to three-page document, which is our goal, that touches
on every specific potential community? If so, do we have just
one-paragraph impact statement, or do we have a threeparagraph impact statement? What works best?
As Glenn noted, the devil truly is in the details. The ultimate
goal, to answer your question directly, Glenn, is at the end of this
process, we have a template that everybody is very comfortable
with and a process that on the day a public comment comes out,
you also have to accompany it a plainly written document in one
of the six UN languages that you can immediately take and ship
off with whatever bow and pretty wrapping paper you have to

Page 19 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

those groups that you’re looking to reach out to or to people in
your community who will help determine what statement you
want to write.
At worst, you’ll have a more educated group of members who
will be able to contribute to the ALAC statement writing process.
At best, you may develop a set of expertise within your regional
At-Large organization where you can have more detailed
discussions within your community. The excitement about this
project is we don’t know what it will look like. That’s also the
scary part about it.
Now in terms of timing, Glenn, you said, “Is it about a year?” It
really is going to be until we burn out the 20. I don’t anticipate
more than one or two in the first couple of months because
Emily and Dan really have to begin to think about, “How do we
set up all the stages of the process?” There will be much more
interaction with you all. You’re going to say, “I don’t like that
format at all, but I like this small impact.” You’re going to be part
of a team of other communities who are also interested in this. I
hope over time, we’ll be able to develop something. I’m very
optimistic about it, but many of you know I’m more of a glass
half full person.
In terms of selecting, Dan and Emily will share with us their
recommendations. We will then share those recommendations

Page 20 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

with your designated reps, and we’ll come to some
understanding about what to pick. What I would just ask for is
patience. We’re going to have 20 of these. We’ll learn over time.
Please help us fail fast and succeed long-term. Thanks.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Rob. One question I had when you
mentioned the dedicated reps, you mentioned monthly calls
with them or a mailing list with them and you on there? How do
you want to formalize this?

ROB HOGGARTH:

We are open to your suggestions because Dan, Emily, and their
colleagues will set that up in partnership primarily with Silvia. In
fairness to the other communities, we really view your group as
the key parts of the experimentation here because of the
breadth of your leadership, because of the breadth of the
communities that you’re engaged with. I think we’re interested,
particularly because you’ll be the largest number as well, in
getting that feedback.
For many years, you've demonstrated great organizational
ability as a community that others don’t really have, in other
words, to be able to quickly bring groups together, set up
schedules, get committed volunteers. If we can get that baseline

Page 21 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

established and then invite others to join that, I think we’ll be in
very good shape. That’s the plan. It will be in partnership with
Silvia, Heidi, and the rest of your group in terms of setting that
up.
Another person who has an important role in this is Ariel in that
she’s also going to be working with Dan and Emily on more of
the drafting side because she’s much more familiar with the
statements that you all generate, with some of the background
information that you may need to assist in educating people
about that. We’re really excited about having their participation
in this effort, as well. I don't know if there’s anything you’d like
to add, Dan.

DAN O’NEILL:

Again, Rob, I just want to touch back with Glenn’s comment, if I
could for just a minute. Two aspects that I wanted to touch on
that we saw as critical as well in terms of being able to do the
kind of outreach and to touch the different communities as
much as we can are both the timing as well as the translation of
the update documents.
First of all, what we would like to do. Our target is to have these
primers produced and distributed on the day in which those
requests for comments go out to the community. The notion
there is that with the usual timing of 40 days for an ICANN

Page 22 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

request for comment response period, as soon as you start
eating into that 40 days, it becomes very challenging. The idea is
to be able to have this document as Rob described it, something
that we see is going to be much easier to read than some of the
background material, very useful, talking about impact of the
particular opportunity.
The second would be the translation service. What we wanted to
do, initially we had talked about with the pilot, launching this in
English only. In conversations with Silvia, Ariel, Heidi, and
others, it became very clear to us that as we talk about the
RALOs and your engagement in this process, the ability to at
least be able to get this out in English, French, and Spanish at
the start would be very valuable. What we have taken on as just
another management challenge is we would like to be able to,
on that day in which the public comment is released, be able to
get this document out to you in English, Spanish, and French.
Again, looking to be able to reach into your communities as
deeply and quickly as we can to give you the understanding and
the value of the document. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Satish Babu?

Page 23 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

SATISH BABU:

EN

Just a clarification or a couple of clarifications. One is
presumably this will be taken in five different groups because we
are five RALOs and we speak different languages. I just want to
check if it’s going to be done in one group or in five separate
groups.
The second is what kind of preparation do you expect us to start
with? When the pilot starts, what do you expect us to do? There’s
a rep, of course, but what else? Are there any other expectations
that you have from these reps or from the RALOs? Thank you.

ROB HOGGARTH:

I’ll take the first, Dan will take the second, and then we’ll clarify
each other if we’re not comfortable with either of our answers.
In terms of one group or five, the pilot is being set up where they
are writing one document. It’s not going to be a separate one for
each RALO and then separate ones for the others. The initial goal
is one document that is released when the public comment
period comes out. That’s the focus.
What we hope to have, though, is feedback from all of you, and
direct feedback on whether it works just for your specific
community. It would be great if you think much more broadly
about how it might help people in other regions of the world, but
we’re much more interested in the expertise from your group.

Page 24 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

The expectation there would be a draft gets generated and it
gets circulated to you because right now, the goal isn’t we’re
picking this public comment period and we’re going to hit the
mark exactly. The first couple might not hit the timing at all, but
the value of the learning is going to be the format and the
content. According to your rep – and we have your rep will work
with your leadership, as well – does it have the segments that
are needed? Does it have an executive summary? Does it need
one? Does it have a module on businesses or registries or civil
society? What does it say, and how in-depth does it go?
The hope is to get that feedback very directly and very candidly.
You all never have had a problem with me on that, and I’m
hopeful and I’ve told Dan and Emily they should expect the
same. It works or it doesn’t. “This one didn’t work. Let’s try
again.” We’re going to give a good shot to each one that comes
out.
I hope that answered that one of your questions. Did you want
to talk about more collaboration?

DAN O’NEILL:

Sure. In terms of your second question, in terms of the ask from
us to you, again, our initial challenge is going to be identifying
and choosing what these initial three, four, five opportunities
are going to be. Again, what we had done initially and some of

Page 25 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

the communities had responded back was to ask if you could
help us prioritize these opportunities. Again, I’m working with
Carlos and others on the policy team to update that document
and understand exactly what opportunities we have over the
next two to three months to circulate that back so that we can
get that feedback back from all of your communities again so
that we have a very clear understanding of what those priorities
are and which ones we want to focus on.
Once we identify what those are, I think that’s where the
collaboration really starts. Working with staff, obviously we were
going to get these opportunities. This is where we are going to
start developing a mechanism to encourage that input back
from your communities into the drafting process initially, being
able to share that draft out, work through questions that you
have, issues that you have with format, content, everything else
so that we’re developing something that is very useful.
Again, the ask would be your continued engagement here. We’re
going to try to put those mechanisms in place to allow that to
happen, whether that be a monthly call or outreach through email or other vehicles to communicate and get that feedback.
That’s the most important at this point.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Silvia Vivanco?

Page 26 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

SILVIA VIVANCO:

EN

Thank you, Olivier. Just to summarize and to organize ourselves,
I think a proposal, an idea for all the RALO leaders, if you wish to
consider perhaps to designate one or two persons per RALO to
work with us, with staff, with me and Ariel and to work with Dan
and Rob on the details so we can start organizing conference
calls, looking at the primer, brainstorming ideas and kick off the
project. My suggestion would be to have one or two persons per
RALO, and then those designated representatives can go back to
their RALOs and start the conversation. That’s the way I think
that we can kick off the project. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you, Silvia. Any thoughts? Glenn McKnight?

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

NARALO has a newsletter, and I was just chatting with Judith
because we’re the only two people here from NARALO. We can’t
really speak for the rest. We have a meeting this week. We’ll ask
our community, and we’ll send out to the newsletter a request
for people to participate. One or two is reasonable from each
organization, but what would be helpful is an infographic of
some kind showing the flowchart on what the expectations are.

Page 27 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

I’ve just done a cut-and-paste from the description. The
expectation is once a month calls. What other expectations? I
want to make sure it’s very clear. I don’t want somebody to sign
up saying, “All it is is once a month call, one hour a month.
That’s it.” Are there more expectations from the process?

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thanks, Glenn. Rob Hoggarth?

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you. I don’t think you should look at this as a monthly or a
weekly exercise. Again, this will be part of the pilot. The input
that goes into the fifth one will be different from the input that
goes into the first one. We’ll get advice from Dan and Emily on
this. I think you should be looking at different stages of the
writing of each of the documents. In other words, you might say,
“We’re going to produce an outline. We’ll want to have a call
after the outline. Then we’ll do a draft, and we’ll just expect email edits back.” Approach it from that perspective, as opposed
to, “We’re meeting every third Tuesday.” I don't think that’s the
right approach for this specific effort. It’s much more projectdriven, not, “This is going to be an ongoing now new obligation
that we have as the community.” It is a pilot and it’s a much
more limited duration.

Page 28 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

The only other thing I’d like to throw into that is – this would be
very helpful to have from all of you – these documents are
ultimately going to be translated into at least the six UN
languages. You may individually, within your own region, say,
“Yeah, we’re going to have to, on the side, translate it into
another language or so,” but I think as part of the drafting
process, it would be interesting – maybe not on the first one or
two, Dan – but to generate some of the drafts in the languages in
which they’re ultimately going to be produced so that we’re not
just translating the final version, but that you have input at every
stage of the process in other languages.
Just something to think about, but again, this is not a time
effort. It’s much more project-driven. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thanks for this, Rob. I think we need to move on. I was going to
just add more thing to this. Did you wish to respond quickly,
Glenn McKnight?

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

Yeah. I do understand it’s a project-based and results-based
approach to this, but asking for volunteer, I need to have some
kind of concept. What are they obligated to do? How much time
commitment? These are busy people, and I don’t want to suck

Page 29 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

them into something thinking that the impression, it’s just a
monthly thing. You’re saying you can’t really put a time to it. It’s
a project-based approach. It may take longer. It may take
shorter. It’s a process more than anything else.

ROB HOGGARTH:

That’s correct. I think what we’ll look for is feedback from Dan
and Emily, new assignment. He was taking notes here to look at
what that process might look like because you’re right, Glenn.
It’s not realistic to ask somebody, particularly when right now,
we don’t know. Then again, there are folks in your communities
who have talked about this before, who’ve expressed interest.
You may have people who are really good writers or folks who
have a particular interest in a particular area. You might have a
different person for a different topic. I don't know.
I think what Silvia’s point was, though, please, just as a start,
maybe it’s you. Then you turn it over, delegate it at a certain
point in time. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Emily Taylor?

Page 30 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EMILY TAYLOR:

EN

Thank you very much. Thanks, Glenn, for that question. It really
raises a very practical issue about how you call on members of
your communities to volunteer for something that is
experimental and could be open-ended.
I do also see as part of the pilot, is for us jointly to understand
the inputs that are needed and the rate of work that’s really
required with us and the community working together for it to
be a success. I would imagine that a starting point would be to
have quite a lot of e-mail exchanges on the mailing list,
supplemented with regular calls. I think that Rob has been very
realistic in outlining the experimental nature. It will probably
take a while to crank up. Probably the first couple of attempts
might well highlight areas that we can improve on.
I know this doesn’t really help in getting a crisp call to action
from your own communities. I think that Rob’s suggestion is very
helpful, that perhaps a way to start might be to add an extra
burden to those who are already highly, highly committed to the
At-Large process and ask for their help. Then once we all
understand it, once it’s part of the template – we’re all seeking
to get a templated approach, and part of that template will be
understanding the expectations of community involvement.
Sorry not to be able to be a bit crisper or more precise, but it was
really to back up that statement. Thank you.

Page 31 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Emily. We do have to move on, but I was
going to close this off with an action item on all the RALOs. I
don't know who’s taking the action items, but I will say it exactly
as it should be recorded. All the RALOs to provide the details of
one or two representatives to take part in this project.
I was going to add one more thing that’s not an action item, but
perhaps it would be. The next face-to-face meeting of the
regional leaderships is going to be in Hyderabad. That’s in
November. It’s quite a few months away. I would suggest
perhaps to Siranush that we might wish to have more than just
one call in between now and Hyderabad, maybe a monthly call
of the regional leaders or every six or seven weeks or something,
so that we could also keep track of this and not only have this
small group of people working with you but also all of the
regional leaders being able to be coordinated with this.
Siranush?

SIRANUSH VARDANYAN:

Noted. I think that this is a good situation. Just related to the
last action item, Satish volunteered to be a member of this
group from APRALO. Thank you.

Page 32 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Siranush. That’s what I love about Asia.
They have answers before you ask the question. It’s so quick like
this. Europe, come on. Catch up.
You do have this advantage. You’re further east, so you’re always
ahead of us. That’s what it is.
Let’s move on, then. Thanks very much.

[SIRANUSH VARDANYAN]:

Actually, this is the only opportunity to see these people in
person.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Just last words from Dan.

DAN O’NEILL:

I would like to add we have had the opportunity to have Emily
Taylor on the phone, who is actually one of those that is going to
be working on producing the primer document. I just wanted to
identify a second individual who we’ve had the opportunity to
speak with, have an onboarding call with. That is Samantha
Dickinson, who has also done some work on other ICANN
projects. Samantha has also agreed to help us with the writing
of these primer documents. I feel very, very strongly about the

Page 33 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

team that we’ve put together and the ability to deliver a very
useful product to you and your colleagues.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: That’s great. Thank you very much, Dan. It’s good to hear some
names that we actually know and who have been following this
community for a long time. Thanks to Dan O’Neill and to Rob
Hoggarth.
We have to move swiftly on with more At-Large Summit
recommendations. The review of ATLAS II, I’ve already given the
introduction. We can move straight to recommendation number
28, but there is one more thing I do need to tell you about, which
is the follow up that Ariel and Heidi and I have been dealing with,
which is nearing the completion of those recommendations. We
have to have a final report at some point. It’s been two years
since they’ve been recommended.
There’s been a lot of work done by the community. There’s even
more work done, and we’re starting to close some of these off.
Many of them are still in progress, but slowly, we’re reaching the
point when we can then say, “What has been done? It’s enough.
Is it something that's been passed on, that's been responded to,
that has been implemented indeed?” and then see if there are
any next steps.

Page 34 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

I don't know how you wish to do this, Ariel, because I know that
you have the control of all the electronics and all this thing.
You’re the number two in line, then, for this, but let’s ask Ariel
first. How do you wish to do this?

ARIEL LIANG:

I think probably we shouldn’t spoil the report for now. I actually
put the text for the implementation details and next step to each
of the recommendations in the Wiki, so let’s just take a look at
the Wiki page and the summary box with the text.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Fantastic. Thank you, Ariel. Recommendation 28 has indeed the
summary. The recommendation itself asks that “the ALAC
should work with all RALOs and At-Large Structures to map the
current expertise and interests in their membership, to identify
its subject matter experts and facilitate policy communication.”
You’ve all heard that before, haven’t you? It’s become a weekly
mantra.
The Implementation Details, as you can see on the screen and
that you can also click on from the agenda, says that “in the fall
2015, each RALO created, distributed, and analyzed a general
survey to understand the subject matter expertise and interests

Page 35 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

of At-Large Structures. The response rate is inconsistent across
RALOs.
“At present, a centralized ALS information database is being
constructed and every ALS will be contacted to check the
accuracy OF their contact, communication, and membership
information. As part of this effort, ALS expertise and interest will
be included in the database, and ALSEs will be asked to provide
that information.”
As Next Steps, there’s just a single line. “At-Large community
leaders will work with ICANN staff to develop a specific
question” – questionnaire perhaps would be the right thing
because we’re not going to ask just one question – “a specific
questionnaire regarding ALS expertise and interest to ask each
ALS; information gathered will be included in the ALS database.”
I’m sorry. My eyes are slowly going to go after a long day like
this.
Are there any comments about this? Humberto Carrasco, you’re
about to bring your flag up. You have the floor. I’m going to have
to put my headphones on.

HUMBERTO CARRASCO:

Thank you very much. I’m going to talk in Spanish. I’d like to tell
you a brief story about this point because, although we did the

Page 36 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

first part of the survey, we realized that it might be possible to
move forward and get some additional information about all the
members of the ALSes. For several reasons, between Marrakech
and today, I haven’t been able to participate in the leaders’
meeting.
I have been able to talk to [Siranush]. I had committed to her to
do this, but I have tried to develop a draft survey because, as you
know, we asked the staff whether there was expert staff that
could help us to create a more professional survey as this. They
said there wasn’t. I took up the challenge of drafting a more
professional survey. Being a good researcher, I actually reviewed
several documents in order to create a survey which was more
accurate.
This has taken more time than I thought it would take me, but I
believe that in the next two or three weeks, I might be able to
submit a draft survey. I will send it to Siranush so that we can
circulate it later on and move forward in this area. Thank you
very much.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: [Thank you very much], Humberto. That’s really great news,
which therefore means we can move on to the next
recommendation. This is firmly in progress. Of course, we’re not
going to provide a final report at this meeting. The aim is to

Page 37 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

make enough progress to have a final report of our
recommendations by Hyderabad, but if in the next three weeks,
we can move on this, that would be very welcome.
The next recommendation is number 42, I believe. This one is as
follows. “ICANN should enable annual face-to-face RALO
assemblies, either at ICANN regional offices or in concert with
regional events.”
I’m not going to read through the full Implementation Details
because I think that you all know what the answer is on this one.
Effectively, what it speaks about is the multi-year proposal for
general assemblies and for At-Large Summits. That, as you know
or might not know, has been now agreed in principle by the
Board for it to go into the overall ICANN budget, so we’ve made
good progress on this. The finance department has adopted the
recommendation.
The Next Step is for “the ALAC Chair, the ALAC subcommittee on
finance and budget, and the ALAC selected ICANN Board director
to maintain a watching brief on the integration of the At-Large
multi-year schedule of general assemblies and summits into
ICANN’s five year operating plan.” That’s the next steps with this.
I don’t really think we can ask for more than this. We’ve
presented it, and it’s been agreed. That looks like we’re set to
actually be able to have those regular general assemblies and

Page 38 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

regular At-Large summits, which means we can move to the next
one, recommendation number 43.
I hadn’t seen. Sorry. Yes, Ron da Silva?

RON DA SILVA:

Thank you. Just thought I’d comment since Rinalia’s not here.
She’s certainly been advocating for these and communicating
with the rest of the Board that that’s the plan and integrating
that into the five-year plan and the budgeting and everything
else. Just wanted to put in a kudos to her since she’s not here to
do so herself.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Ron. It’s great that now when we have a
Board member missing, they send someone else, as well. That’s
really good to see you here, so thank you.
Next recommendation is…

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

[inaudible]

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: What other end? That’s because you’re not putting your flag up. I
thought you were just waving your hand around.

Page 39 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

EN

I can give you my glasses if you want.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: No, that’s fine. Go ahead, Glenn.

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

You skipped 31?

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Yes, I will go back to 31, sorry. It’s just that I think I opened one
window after another and I missed that one. It’s a good point.
Let’s go to recommendation 31, where Glenn McKnight is going
to provide us with an update after I read the recommendation,
which is that “ICANN and the ALAC should investigate the use of
simple tools and methods to facilitate participation in public
comments and the use of crowdsourcing.” Glenn McKnight?

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

This has not only fallen on myself, but it actually went back to
the TTF, so Dev and I will talk about two products: eXo, and in
our next TTF meeting, we’re actually going to be demonstrating
a product that’s being used by NCUC. Dev, did you want to talk
about the two?

Page 40 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

EN

Just as an acronym, the acronym police would call it the
Technology Taskforce.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thank you. Yes, the Technology Taskforce has been looking at
this recommendation. We have three possible tools in play,
actually, and we’ll be discussing it fully at our Thursday 8:00 AM
session.
Briefly, the eXo platform has possible potential for solving the
recommendation 26, which is the policy management process
system, in terms of being able to track a person’s comments.
They appear in an activity stream. You can then search by those
streams and even create spaces for likeminded persons to then
be grouped together and then start commenting on things.
That’s one thing. We’ll be discussing with ICANN’s IT staff as to
how we can best test this tool.
The second tool was something similar to a product that we
identified, LiquidFeedback, something called Kialo. Jimmy
Schulz knows the developer of that product, and he will be
arranging to have that person on our next Technology Taskforce
call after Helsinki.
The third one was … Oh, dear. Now my mind’s gone blank.

Page 41 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: The early afternoon blank, which affects us all after lunch.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: That’s what happens with no lunch and no coffee.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Was it SLACK?

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Yes. I’m going back to group chat applications. Thanks for that
trigger. It was a group chat application, such as SLACK, and
NCUC is using a trial chat application similar to that. They will be
demoing it on the Tuesday session. Thanks.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Dev Anand Teelucksingh. It certainly is
one of these recommendations where an enormous amount of
work has taken place, so we’re very thankful that the
Technology Taskforce has taken this not with just one hand, but
with both hands, their teeth, and everything else. The weekly
calls have been very productive. This whole technology thing is
particularly important because of the fact that we are so
distributed around the world. In some parts of the world, it
might be difficult to use some of these tools, so being able to
Page 42 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

actually do hands-on testing. I know that it’s a vibrant working
group. It’s really good to have that.
Seeing no other hands around the table, let’s go on then to
recommendation number 42. That’s not right. Number 43. There
we are. “RALOs should encourage their inactive ALS
representatives to comply with ALAC minimum participation
requirements.”
Earlier this week, there was a discussion – I think it was
yesterday. Yes, it was yesterday – on ALS engagement and
metrics, since that is a component part of the overall discussion.
The North American At-Large Organization, so NARALO and
APRALO, have both made great efforts in contacting inactive AtLarge Structures and informing them of minimal participation
requirements. I don't know what it is like with the other RALOs,
but it’s certainly something that we can’t say is just an ALAC
thing. This is our own ALS representatives that have been asking
for this because obviously they’re the ones spending the time in
the rooms and thinking, “Why should we drag along all of the
ones that are not doing this?”
Maybe Siranush Vardanyan can provide us with some thoughts
on this, and Judith afterwards, yes. Siranush Vardanyan?

Page 43 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

SIRANUSH VARDANYAN:

EN

Actually, I would like to tell you about one initiative which
APRALO decided to start, and we’re already in the process of
discussion among leadership team. This is APRALO mentoring
project, which we have an intention to put as part of our strategy
for Fiscal Year 17. We intend to start the actual process from
Hyderabad until Copenhagen to develop the capacity of the next
generation for APRALO. That’s some kind of [the stuff].
We already put this idea into our mailing list, and we already
have nine or ten people express their willingness to be a mentee
in this process. We will be doing pre- and post-survey among
those people to find out more about their interest to match
mentees and mentors among APRALO leadership team, as well. I
hope that this will be a very good process for ourselves, as well,
to learn and encourage ALSes to become more active in policy
discussions, in discussions of any type within the RALO, as well.
That’s just as an update from our part on this.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thanks very much for this, Siranush. It’s good to see that there’s
of course not only the threat of minimum participation
requirements with the metrics, but there is also this enticing,
this pulling forward and saying, “Let us help you be a better
participant or a more active participant in this.” It’s great to see
that, and I think we can all learn from this. Judith Hellerstein?

Page 44 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

EN

This is Judith Hellerstein for the record, NARALO Secretary.
Glenn and I have done a lot of work on outreach, as you
mentioned, in trying to reengage our ALSes. One of the things
that we found that we needed to correct as we’re doing it is that
we found out that according to NARALO’s rules and procedures,
we don’t have any minimum requirements. We’re looking at
APRALO’s and some other ones of modifying our rules and
procedures so that we can have some type of minimum
requirements, whether it be attendance at a NARALO meeting,
participation in the working group, comments. We just want
some kind of engagement and have some basic metrics so that if
people are not doing that, we would want to get at them
possibly. Also looking at having more than one contact person,
so maybe two or three because sometimes some people are very
busy and they can’t get to it. They always intend to, but if you
have a second contact or a third, we can get them involved.
We’ve been doing also, not official mentor programs, but we’ve
been asking at our monthly meetings what different ALSes are
up to and figuring out what are their interests and how can we
address them. Also, found out a lot of them are not very
knowledgeable about what the RALO is doing and what ICANN is
offering. We’re also putting together a series of discussions with
members on what are the different tools that are out there. Last

Page 45 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

year, for our recent elections, we did a get to know your
candidates. We rolled out to the different ALSes, saying, “Please
send us your questions, either advance or afterwards,” and
trying to get them to come to the get to know your candidates.
It’s our effort to reach out to different groups within our area.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thanks very much, Judith. I note that in EURALO, we had a
general assembly earlier. We touched on this, as well. Maritza
Aguero? Then did you wish to speak as well, Aziz? Then we’ll
close the queue after Aziz because we really need to move on
with this. Maritza?

MARITZA AGUERO:

Thank you very much. I’m going to speak in Spanish, so please,
your headphones.
As regards recommendation 43, we have a document. The
corresponding working group has a draft project to implement a
series of metrics. That document, due to the [inaudible]
situation through which LACRALO is going through, is still in
standby mode. Latest draft dates back to the beginning of the
first quarter this year. This was reported to the RALO secretariat
mailing list in May 16. We trust that very soon, we will be able to
go back to this issue and continue with the proposal that was

Page 46 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

initially submitted so as to provide our feedback and move
forward. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Maritza. Aziz Hilali?

AZIZ HILALI:

Thank you, Olivier. I’m going to speak in French. I just wanted to
add a comment. It’s very good to work on capacity building for
ALSes. It’s very good, but we need to think a little bit to go
farther at the local level. We need to work with young people,
with students. I want to remind you the experience we made in
Marrakech in which we were during the ICANN meeting with
students. Also, after the capacity building we made with these
students in Marrakech at the university level that was near the
meeting venue in Marrakech, afterward, we have received
around 100 applications for our ALSes because after this
meeting, they were really interested. They wanted to know more
about ICANN, about Internet at the local level. That is very
positive.
I also wanted to say that at the AFRALO level, we have realized
some webinars on the IANA transition and we are also trying to
recreate the working group on the new rules of AFRALO. I’m
finished.

Page 47 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Aziz. [We’ll move] on to the next
recommendation. I believe it is number 29. This one says that
“the ALAC should implement an automated system for tracking
topics of interest currently being discussed among the various
RALOs and accessible by everyone.”
Dev had alluded a little bit to some of these tools. I think maybe
what you gave as an answer earlier would probably qualify with
that, as well. Did you have anything else to add, Dev Anand
Teelucksingh?

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: No, not at this moment. Like I said, we’ll be discussing with
ICANN’s IT staff on how to do the testing of these tools.
Hopefully, we’ll get some answers next month.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Dev. I think we’ve gone through the
recommendations at quite a good pace, but as I said, there is
going to be some more work soon with Ariel to finalize some of
these over the summer and over the next few months, and of
course, with the additional input that will be received from the
different working groups.

Page 48 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

Have I missed anything? I have missed something.
Correct. The way the process will work is that we’ll have a first
draft ready at some point. Let’s not put a deadline. Let’s not do
it like everything in ICANN. You put a deadline and then you
come back afterwards and say, “We can’t hold that deadline.”
We’ll have a first draft ready. That will go back to the ATLAS II
recommendation taskforce. They will be able to review it, refine
it, change it, and so on. Their aim is to be able to have it before
the ALAC itself for, again, ratification, etc., by the Hyderabad
meeting, which is in November.
Heidi Ullrich?

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Thank you. Two comments. I believe that the plan then, after the
ALAC looks at it one more time, is that it’s then going to go to the
Board via perhaps the ALAC speaking to the Board in Hyderabad.
Also just to note that when Rinalia speaks to all of us as well as
the ALAC on Thursday, that draft report, she’s going to be
looking at it. You’re going to be presenting it, I believe, Olivier,
this Thursday. Then just getting some feedback, her initial
feedback on the approach to the draft. That’s what we discussed
earlier.

Page 49 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thanks very much, Heidi. I’m glad I got told about it now. Did I
get told about it?

HEIDI ULLRICH:

I’m reminding you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: You’re reminding me. Okay. I wasn’t even aware of the original
request. Fine, your people will get with my people and we’ll
make things happen. No, that’s the wrong place.
Let’s go to agenda item 4. We only have 15 minutes. In fact, 11
minutes until the end of this meeting, and we still have 35
minutes’ worth of things to go through. That’s going to be hard.
The next one is really going to be easy because it’s the planning
of At-Large face-to-face meetings. That, we’ve already gone
through. As I said, this is the statement which was submitted
and which was agreed on by ICANN finance.
We can swiftly move on to number five, the FY17 special requests
for RALOs. What do we do as next steps? I’m not quite sure. It
does put my name next to it, but I wasn’t quite sure whether we
would have to actually review what was done or what was
granted. I know that there was a meeting of the finance

Page 50 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

yesterday, so it sounds to me like we’re redoing what we did
yesterday. Heidi Ullrich?

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Yes, thank you, Olivier. Yes. I think most of us were there
yesterday when each of the requests were reviewed. The next
step, as set up by [Alan], is that the finance and budget
subcommittee will be convening shortly to go over the details of
the implementation, including who’s going to be [leading] that
from the community, as well as any materials that might be
needed. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Heidi. It takes me to the agenda item
which I’ve been waiting for. I’m a bit concerned because neither
Holly Raiche nor Cheryl Langdon-Orr are here. I’ve been
watching the room ever since being there.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Heidi’s going to [get her].

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Someone might be following us remotely. Might they be in
Aurora next door, thinking that they could just jump in? I do
know that Cheryl is following us remotely. She’s always follow us

Page 51 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

remotely. She’s actually following most of the meetings in this
building remotely.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Heidi went to get her.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Heidi went to get her. Holly is not online, but that means we’ve
got 15 minutes. In the meantime, what we can do is to go for the
any other business discussion so we don’t waste any time. Are
there any points that anybody would like to bring up or
questions, comments, cooking recipes? Judith Hellerstein?

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

I very much liked the description that Ariel was talking about
yesterday about the online databases. I think that’s going to be
very useful for us, especially as we are trying to do our work in
reengaging our ALSes. I look forward to having access to that
database and being able to use it.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much for this, Judith. Indeed, another step
forward. In the meantime, we’ve got Ariel Liang first and then
we’ll go over to Holly Raiche, who has just stepped into the
room. Ariel, you have the floor.

Page 52 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

ARIEL LIANG:

EN

Thanks, Olivier. Just to respond to Judith, the database, only
staff can have admin access at this point, but we will collaborate
with RALO leaders to get all the data points accurate and [then]
we will have an interim database to share with you. Then we will
put that into the online database that we’re in process
constructing. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Ariel. Now we have Holly Raiche and
Cheryl Langdon-Orr joining us to speak to us about the At-Large
review and its impact on the RALOs. For those people that were
in the room during the EURALO general assembly, we had one of
the people from ITEMS, the company that is doing the review.
I’m not going to say what Holly and Cheryl have to say, so I think
I can pass the floor over to Holly and Cheryl. Holly, you have the
floor.

HOLLY RAICHE:

Cheryl will follow me, brilliantly.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

I’m not following you.

Page 53 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

HOLLY RAICHE:

EN

I think all of you have probably followed the progress. We
started off several months ago in terms of realizing that the
review was scheduled, working with the structural – I’ve
forgotten – [inaudible] structural committee.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Structural improvements committee.

HOLLY RAICHE:

Structural improvements committee, working with them in
terms of finalizing the sorts of qualifications we wanted, the sort
of questions we wanted. In terms of getting the information
together to select the kind of independent examiner that would
actually try to understand what we do. To back up, we’ve had a
review of ALAC. It started off in 2008. At the time, the RALOs were
barely in existence. ALSes were probably existent, but not within
the structure very well. The first and only review of ALAC
concentrated just on ALAC. This review – and this review is part
of the constant review process that is written into ICANN’s
Constitution – will therefore focus very much on RALOs and
ALSes and how they actually contribute to the ICANN process.
Where we’re up to now: the independent examiner, based on
criteria that is standard to ICANN but also with input from all of
you, has been selected. The team is here. There are four people.

Page 54 of 66

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

There’s Tim, Tom, Nick, and Rosa. They’ve been assigned to
various regions. We’re all meeting them and talking to them. In
fact, in about ten minutes, members of APRALO will be talking to
our examiner.
Where we are up to, based on all of the interviews that they will
have done with all of you, they will then develop a survey
following on the sorts of input that they’ve had. Based on that
survey and on the interviews and discussions they’ve had, they
will then come up with a draft report, which will be given back to
the working party, particularly to Cheryl and myself, for input,
for comment, for whatever. If my schedule is right, by the end of
the year there will be a final report. I have to say, at that time,
that's

when

the

fun

begins

because

there

will

be

recommendations. Presumably how to improve, although I
recognize none of you think we need improvement, but just in
case, how to improve the structures, how to actually make the
structures that we have more a part of the achievements of
ICANN’s mission.
Where we’re up to now is really the four team ITEMS are going to
be talking to all of us. What they’ve done is offer various ways of
communicating with them. What APRALO has done is say, “We’re
just going to have” – I was going to say “group think,” but that’s
Orwellian – “We’re going to have a group meeting with them,
talking through our own vision of our particular RALO and how it

Page 55 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

works.” You can do the thinking and the meeting that way. You
can do it individually, or you can do both. It will be your call as to
how that’s done, but they certainly are looking forward to
talking with all of you on input into how you’ve input into the
ICANN process, what you think works, and what you think
doesn’t work.
I would urge all of you to make whatever effort you can to talk to
the team leader that has been assigned to your area, and then
when it comes time for the survey, to actually participate in the
survey. Then you will be hearing from us again. Cheryl?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you, Holly. One of the things I wanted to take a couple of
minutes today to talk specifically to you as regional leadership is
a little bit about what you can expect and what you should plan
for for this process. We have Wikis. You know how to use them.
We have resource material. You know how to look it up, but
what can you expect?
This is very much an opportunity to have an externally managed
and unbiased view by people who are looking at us, and in this
case, particularly you and your parts of ICANN in context of AtLarge – and keep thinking At-Large. It would be nice if we kept
saying At-Large more in this next 12 months, as opposed to the
RALOs and then have to say this one, this one, this one. Let’s

Page 56 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

think from an At-Large and then RALO and, of course, ALAC as
well – as a fitness for purpose test. That’s pretty much what’s
going to be happening. We will be looked at and an analysis will
be made and an outcome will indicate how fit we are as entities
for the purpose we are in this organization to do.
If you think about it as organizational RALO or At-Large Structure
fitness for purpose, it will help you take a journey that is
designed really to improve us all and to find perhaps novel or
new ways of doing what we do well even better. If you come into
this exercise and treat it as a threat or as critical to your
professionalism and skills, it will be a very uncomfortable
situation that you’ll be putting yourselves in. I’d like to
particularly encourage you because the At-Large Structures will
be looking to you for explanation as to why is this happening
and what’s going on and does this mean everything’s going to
change and does change mean risk. You’re the first point to give
a degree of confidence and understanding as to why all of this is
a good thing, and it is.
You also should remember to reassure everyone involved,
including yourselves from time to time, that as a result of very
good, deep thought-out advice on how we might do some things
better, achieve our aims more effectively, make a better model
for us all to benefit from, it will be up to us to implement. There
may very well be then an opportunity for you to increase

Page 57 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

engagement in your areas by getting more people that have just
had their appetite whetted by doing a survey or being
interviewed to get more deeply engaged in your region by
getting them on board in parallel implementation.
I’m looking to Dev because he knows how much we all got to get
to know each other and how we grew as a broader leadership
team, not just the 15-person ALAC, but the 15-person ALAC and
the key people in the region when we did the implementation of
what the suggestions were as a result of our first review.
Take it as positive. Take it as an opportunity, and take it that you
can ask veterans like Olivier and like me at any time to come and
talk to your At-Large Structures. The ITEMS people will be there
to help and make it as positive and as gentle as possible, but we
can also do things to help, as well. You are a partner in this
process. Don’t be passive. Make it the best you can make it, and
you will reward and our organizations will, as well. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Cheryl. That was eloquently said and
quite robust, I would say, as well.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Page 58 of 66

Moi?

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Heidi Ullrich?

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Thank you, Olivier. Thank you, Holly and Cheryl. [inaudible]

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

I do apologize. I have to know where my next meeting was going
to be, which is starting now. They’re all leaving for it.

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Actually, the next one is 3:15 is you’re looking for the auction
proceeds.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

How little you know of my diary. Go on.

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Your point about how the RALO leadership could communicate
with their At-Large Structures, very good point. Do you have any
particular suggestions on how best they might wish to do that?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

One of the things I’d like to suggest – Holly, I’ll just hold the fort
here. You go do the more needful and give my apologies in

Page 59 of 66

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

advance. I’ll get there eventually, or not. The fact that you’ve all
had briefings and have a set of information and knowledge, that
now needs to be shared. That needs to be shared in a way that’s
most effective for your communities. Your communities may
benefit more from having a PDF attachment that you can send
out off a mailing list. It may benefit by also, or instead of having
an active Wiki within your regional space, it could of course
benefit

by

holding

a

regional

webinar.

In the case of some regions, this can be done in different
languages and in different time zones. All of those opportunities
allow you to build a body of work that when an At-Large
Structure or an individual member, which many of our regions
have now, and they’ve just not been available at 13:00 UTC that
day, they know that they can pick up that information and pick
up, “Why am I getting asked to do more than one type of review
survey?” We may end up doing different things at different
times.
We also should probably, in my very biased view as someone
who’s run a few meetings in their time, including some regional
ones, have, if not at every meeting, at regular meetings, a fixed
agenda item whereby the update on what’s happening with the
ALAC and At-Large review is looked at.

Page 60 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

It may be one of those meetings, it will be a two-minute section,
and at other meetings, it will be a ten-minute discussion with
pre-provided support information and links that people have
had to look at. I’d go for diverse.
I would also suggest that while we go through this process, you
will also warn your At-Large Structures, and particularly those
that are likely to be engaging with other activities in the Internet
ecosystem in their area, that it is quite possible that you will run
into some of the review team, the independent examiners, who
will be attending a non-ICANN meeting and approaching them in
that context for sharing of information and perhaps even follow
up on something they may have seen earlier. Forewarned is
forearmed. Not everyone can just respond to questions at the
drop of a hat, so share information in as many ways as you think
is practical. Any other questions?

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Tijani Ben Jamaa?

TIJANI BEN JAMAA:

Thank you very much, Olivier. Very relevant point, Heidi. I think
that this review without the ALSes will not be really a real review
of the At-Large. We need this involvement of the ALSes, and it
cannot be one size fits all. Each region should have its own way

Page 61 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

to do it. It must be for each call a section about it. Second, we
have to have something for such as Wiki, as you said. Very good.
Also, I would like the team, the four people of the review, to have
the contact of our ALSes and to interview them, also. This is the
way we will have a real review of the At-Large. Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you very much, Tijani. [inaudible] came over to make the
foolish mistake of talking to me while I am concentrating on
someone who’s speaking to me, so he got the usually polite
“Wait,” as anyone, including the CEO, would get if they did
exactly the same thing. He then got partway through his
sentence, which says, “I’d be happy to provide progress updates
to At-Large at a -” I believe the rest of it would be regional
meeting.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[And on a] regular basis, actually.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

And on a regular basis. That’s good, but that it’s not just a oneway update. It’s an opportunity for questions, what’s happening
next, why is it happening, etc. Yes, one size is not going to fit all,
but you certainly need to all make sure you look at what each
other’s doing and say, “Are the regional leadership team in that

Page 62 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

region doing something my region could benefit from?” Cheat
sheet off each other and just all make it better.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you. Tijani, if you could please turn your mic off, as well.
I think that we’ve gone through each way of all of the ALS
metrics. What am I saying? Not the metrics. The At-Large review.
I was going to say, “We still have one AOB which says metrics on
there, and I was just wondering.” It’s not even a five-minute
thing because we’ve already done all of our AOB.
I was just going to mention two words on the metrics. How is the
ALS metrics working group doing?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Let me take a dollar each way. The term metrics may be
interpreted to belong in a number of places these days. If that
reference was in fact for the At-Large Structure expectations and
criterion, then that is an active group which you have recently
seen an update of. There is a lot of opportunity for more input,
especially as we move to our next phase of work because we’re
starting to put our draft documents. Our draft documents need
feedback from you and your regions and your At-Large
Structures.

Page 63 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

EN

If that is what that refers to, then it’s live. It’s important that part
of our time is spent on that, and it actually dovetails with the
review process because criterion expectations is a natural fit
when we’re looking at something that says how fit for purpose
are At-Large Structures. Are we recruiting right, for the right
reasons, giving the right information, enabling in the right way?
All of those questions will be helped by exploring that work, as
well.
If you mean the dim, dark, distance past on the not yet bereaved
but still sitting on a life support system metrics working group,
when we have far too few committed people volunteering for
key roles, a consequence of just human bandwidth is when they
are taken elsewhere for more time-critical activities – and
apparently there’s an IANA transition thing that hopefully by the
end of the year something might have happened about – if that
happened, then a lot of work that's being done will have been
validated, but we simply put that work on the back burner for
now. It is absolutely flick a switch and it’s ready to go, but ladies
and gentlemen, I will not let an opportunity go past for a quick
ad while I have the microphone.
It would be marvelous if each of your regions could now look at
even that metrics working group and say when that gets turned
back on and they call for a refresh of people because many of
the people who are currently listed as working group members

Page 64 of 66

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

are no longer in the roles and positions that they had when they
were put on that work in the first place. You can start looking
now for enthusiasm, for talent, for skillsets, for people who just
want to do something and they’re not sure what yet, and get
them to join us when we start that up fresh and get that going
again.
Anybody who has any concerns or questions about the metrics
working group should see Maureen Hilyard or myself.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you, Cheryl. Tijani, 30 second question or comment.

TIJANI BEN JAMAA:

Thank you. Thank you very much, Cheryl. Our RALO has its
operating principle and a review. One of the points that are
reviewed

are

the

performances

and

the

metrics

for

performances. Unfortunately, we were supposed to finish it in
the end of 2015. You know. We resume now, and by the end of
this year, it will be for sure finished. Please don’t finish your
work before we give you our input because I think that,
especially for the performance [and metrics], it must be each
region has its own way to do. As you know, the cultural
difference, etc. Thank you.

Page 65 of 66

HELSINKI – At-Large and Regional Leadership Meeting

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

EN

Thank you for that, Tijani. Just briefly in closing on that, what
you said is vital because what the metrics working group has
done is said, “Here are some overarching principles and some
methodologies we can use. The specifics are, of course,
culturally sensitive and going to be best managed within that
larger framework by specifics within region.” I’m delighted to
hear you’ve made that particular commitment because as I’ve
seen now, all but – Has LACRALO finished their review yet? No,
they’ve not finished their rules of procedure. No. As I’ve seen
NARALO has done theirs. I believe EURALO is or hasn’t yet, is
about to. APRALO has done theirs, and now AFRALO is doing
theirs. Metrics component has become a new, in some cases, but
a very important part of the outcome document, so looking
forward to that.
There’s not a hope in Hades that we will be finished before
you’re finished. I can assure you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Cheryl. With a big thanks to the
interpreters for staying another extra 15 minutes, I’d like to close
the meeting. Thank you and goodbye.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 66 of 66

