EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 09:15 to 10:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

[GIOVANNI SEPPIA]:

We’ll start in two minutes.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen, and thank you for
attending the ccNSO Strategy and Operating Plan Working
Group meeting here at the ICANN 56 policy forum in Helsinki. We
have circulated the agenda the [past week] of this meeting, but
before I get into that, I would like a quick tour de table to
introduce each other and making sure that those who are not
familiar with each other, they know the names and affiliations.
I’d like to start from my left. Patrick?

PATRICK JONES:

Patrick Jones with the ICANN global engagement team.

ALEKSANDAR POPOVIC:

Aleksandar Popovic, .rs.

MICHAEL VASSILAKIS:

Michael Vassilakis with .gr.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

JOKE BRAEKEN:

Joke Braeken, ccNSO secretariat.

BECKY NASH:

Becky Nash with the ICANN finance team.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Giovanni Seppia, .eu, EURid.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Xavier Calvez, CFO.

TARYN PRESLEY:

Taryn Presley, ICANN staff, finance department.

DEBBIE MONAHAN:

Debbie Monahan, .nz.

BART BOSWINKEL:

Bart Boswinkel, ccNSO secretariat.

ALLAN MACGILLIVRAY:

Allan MacGillivray, .ca, CIRA.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Mathieu Weill, .fr, AFNIC.

Page 2 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

STEPHEN DEERHAKE:

Stephen Deerhake, .as, American Samoa.

SOULEYMANE OUMTANAGA: Souleymane Oumtanaga, .ci, [inaudible].

BARRACK OTIENO:

Barrack Otieno, AfTLD, Africa Top Level Domains Organization.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible], regulator of Togo, ccTLD of Togo. Thank you.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you, and good morning again. I have to record two
apologies from [Wafa] and [Paul], who cannot be with us today
and they send their regret for not being able to join the meeting
in person or remotely this morning.
We have circulated this agenda, and I have liaised together with
Bart, with Xavier and his team regarding the structure of this
meeting. On the 25th of April this year, the ccNSO Strategy and
Operating Plan Working Group has submitted its input to the
ICANN Fiscal Year 17 Operating Plan and Budget.
We divided ourselves into sub-working groups as usual, and

Page 3 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

each sub-working group produced the input on some specific
parts of the Operating Plan and Budget. There was a preamble
which was highlighting some recurring themes in the feedback
that we provided, including – this is a recurring theme – the need
to introduce more and more precise KPIs and also the need to
include more timeframes for the different projects and different
activities in the strategy plan and budget.
Also, there was a need to specify more in details certain figures
for some of – this is shown now on the screen – the feedback
that the Strategy and Operating Plan Working Group provided to
ICANN and also, as I was saying, to get more details on certain
figures.
I went through the ICANN response, which was uploaded
recently on the ICANN site, to all the comments that were
received by ICANN on the Fiscal Year 17 Operating Plan and
Budget, and there are quite good responses to the different
points we raised, while there are also some other points that
were postponed. There’s a commitment at ICANN’s side to
provide more details at a later stage or to incorporate the
clarification in the final draft of the fiscal year Operating Plan
and Budget, which is going to be approved by the Board.
I would like to say that I was very happy, and I have to
acknowledge the work that has been done by the different

Page 4 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

members of the working group. Thanks again for your
commitment to provide your feedback on time. That allowed me
to put everything together and submit it to ICANN.
At the same time, I would like also to acknowledge a quite good
comment made by another stakeholder group. It’s a comment
regarding the [expenses] part of the plan. The other stakeholder
working group made a very good comment regarding certain
figures for which there is going to be an increase in the Fiscal
Year 17 Operating Plan and Budget. They highlighted that they
appreciate this increase because it shows how much ICANN is
caring for certain new teams, certain new areas, including cyber
security. It’s positive from this stakeholder group to see the
increase of certain figures.
I would like, before I leave the floor to Xavier, to invite our
working group to also provide these kind of comments and be
included. Whenever we see that there is an increase in figures
and we believe that it’s valuable to have an increase of
investments at ICANN side on certain areas, we can stress it
instead of always saying, “Why did you increase this figure
instead of another?” or something like that, just to also have a
positive approach and say openly that if we believe that some
areas are worth to be having more investments, more resources,
that could be a good point to stress in our input.

Page 5 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

With that said, I’d like to leave the floor to Xavier, who has
prepared a presentation about the input we submitted and the
feedback to our input, which they recently published on the
ICANN site. Thank you. Xavier?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you, Giovanni. Good morning, everyone. Before we go
over our presentation, I want to acknowledge the fact that your
group is one that, for us and across the community, as you
know, everyone looks forward to hearing from. The public
comment process on the Operating Plan and Budget is one
that’s very substantive. Your group has history, knowledge,
expertise in looking at the management of organizations and it’s
concentrating an expertise that’s actually unique in the
community.
We look forward for your comments very much when the time
comes for the end of the public comment period. We know that
your colleagues in the community look forward to your
comments, as well, and will take guidance from your comments.
I simply want to acknowledge that your work in this working
group is very important and beyond simply the value that you
deliver directly to ICANN. It has value to the community. Not that
I am saying anything you don’t already know, but I simply want
to emphasize that that’s the case. I hope the participation in this

Page 6 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

working group can continue to be as strong as it has been. Next
slide, please.
We’ll go over the comments. We have a short summary of the
comments, just so that you see the magnitude of the comments
and the number of comments that have been received. Then
we’ll go over the comments that the ccNSO provided, and we’ll
not necessarily go into detail of every one of them, but we’ll be
very happy to highlight any one of them that you think are of
particular interest. If you would like that we stop on any of them
to dive a bit into the answer, please feel free to raise your hand
and then we’ll do that.
We’ll talk a little bit about an aspect of the budget that has
recently been settled, and we’ll close with that.
I would suggest that considering the size of the group, if you’re
okay with that, that people jump in as we go. Let’s make it very
interactive.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Especially, to shut you up. [inaudible]

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Yes, exactly. That gives me a break, as well.

Page 7 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

Next slide, please. Just to give you a quick overview of what the
public comment process has been this year in the public
comment period, 12 different organizations provided about 150
comments, a bit more. This is the largest amount of comments
that we have received in the past at least five years, which we
consider a success. That demonstrates an increase in interest
and participation. The planning process and the budget process
for ICANN is a pillar of the multistakeholder model, and the
participation in this process is key.
We think this is very good, though at the same time, we know
the investment it requires from community members to be able
to comment on the budget. It’s very massive, deep, and wide
information. It’s challenging to grasp, to understand unless you
are an expert. In this group, I think you have that expertise, but
in many other parts of the organization, that expertise does not
exist. It’s very complicated to enter into this process and be able
to comment, so we need to find ways to lower the bar of access
to being able to understand and participate in the planning
process in the future.
You see here the themes. I won’t go necessarily over them. I’ll
simply highlight the largest ones in terms of number of
comments. Financial management is a bit of a bucket relative to
the comments – and we’ve received 24 comments on that – on
the total revenue, the total expenses, on the governance relative

Page 8 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

to the finance for the organization. The process has also been
the subject of a large number of comments, the 23, and not
surprisingly, the IANA stewardship transition has also been the
subject a large number of comments.
Not surprisingly to this group, the KPI definition and structure is
also an area that has received a lot of interest across the
community, not only from this group. We’re thankful for that
because this is an area that’s relatively new in our operating
plan. It really has kicked off last August with the beta version of
the dashboard. Now we are in version one since February. We
have another version two that is planned to kick in, in October,
and each of those versions try to include improvements in the
KPIs, in their accuracy, in their relevance, in their definition.
Those versions result from the input that we collect through
these various processes, as well on a less formal basis. Keep it
coming. We need this input on the KPIs and the dashboard so
that we can continue improving that aspect of the organization
and the plan.
Any questions on this overview? Okay, so let’s dive in. Next,
please.
We have listed on the next few slides the comments that this
group has provided on behalf of the ccNSO. Can you go back a
[second]? Thank you. Next. I would like to speak to one of the

Page 9 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

comments, which is the one at the bottom on this slide relative
to the consistency or lack of consistency on the operating plan
and the structure of the operating plan. I want to remind
everyone that our operating plan is based upon the
management system that each manager at ICANN uses on a
daily basis to manage projects. Those projects are aggregated in
portfolios. The portfolios then are aggregated into goals and
then objectives.
The comment is one that I have myself, that our team has, as
well. Because it is a tool that is used every day across the entire
organization, it is subject to the expertise and structure of each
of the managers of ICANN. The lack of consistency that is
pointed out here is actually the reflection of the different levels
of either expertise or different type of usage of the management
system that you can see across all the departments of ICANN.
For example, the policy department in which Bart is has a way of
using the number of projects that’s relatively detailed and that
isolates each of the policy development processes on an
individual basis. For the finance department that I head, we
have a very limited number of projects that capture the general
day-to-day activities and just one or two or three projects. We
have, across two departments, a different way of using our
management system, and that translates from an external
perspective looking at the operating plan, into discrepancies in

Page 10 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

the structure and depth sometimes of the operating plan that
comes out.
While it is, in our views, logical that the way each department
that is different uses differently the management system and
therefore the operating plan, we also recognize that it comes
across as inconsistency, and sometimes it is. This is something
we internally need to work on, is to be able to educate the
managers in the organization and try to guide these managers to
using in as consistent fashion as possible the management
system of the organization, while using it in a fashion that
supports adequately their operations that can be very different.
This is something we need to put emphasis on.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Xavier, thank you for clarifying this. If I remember correctly
somewhere on the floor – No, it’s okay. I’ll do that later.
Somewhere, there is written in the feedback of the comments
that there is a process to develop internal guidelines to educate
the management how to populate with details and content the
plan.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

That’s correct. That’s one of the tools that we’re trying to use to
improve that consistency and that level of detail. I would also

Page 11 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

say that the KPIs help us structure better the projects and
portfolios because when we formulate a KPI that measures
either the effort or the outcome or ideally both of the activity,
then it’s also easier to structure adequately the activity.
We have seen that the use of KPIs was making the structuring of
the projects within the operating plan more adequate and more
relevant. That’s been something that's come across notably
from Patrick’s team, the GSE team, the Global Stakeholder
Engagement team who has done a lot of work over the past
months on formulating KPIs. That work translates into a
structure of the projects and the portfolios that now makes
more sense and is more transparently demonstrating the
activities of the organization and the outcome of those
activities. There’s a quality improvement that results from
introducing the KPIs. Not that any of you are surprised with that
because that’s why you have made those comments over the
years, but we now see the benefits of that.
It’s a challenging exercise to do, but this is one that we need to
continue doing all the time. Unless there’s other questions, I’ll
move on.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Page 12 of 51

Are the guidelines being produced?

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Yes. We have guidelines on how to structure projects, how to
describe it. That also provides guidance on creating milestones
for the projects and linking obviously those milestones with the
five year operating plan if the project carries over several years.
That helps. We are trying to roll out those guidelines across the
organization. We need to find better ways to continuously
support the managers through the organization to apply those
guidelines [well]. We need to put in place that quality control
and that guidance to ensure that those guidelines are
understood, applied, and effective. That’s going to be the next
step for us.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

And the next step from a time perspective is when?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Is going to be defined through this planning cycle for FY18 that
we’re going to start now because we are now going to work over
the next few weeks on how we are going to ask the budget
owners to structure their projects, to structure their operating
plan for the planning of FY18, which will start in the next few
weeks.

Page 13 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Would you find it useful, then, as part of that, Xavier, if we gave
you comments? If I’d go to your dashboard, some of the
progress reports are really clear and easy. You can tune in and
you can get a picture of where that manager sees the project is
at against the KPI. Then others have got a number, and they
might have a [cutted line], but I’ve really got no idea as to what
that actually means when they say “things are progressing.”
I’ve got two examples I’ve just looked at in the last five minutes.
I’m thinking, is it useful if we say, “These ones are fairly useful
and that one’s not so much?”

XAVIER CALVEZ:

That definitely would be, so don’t hesitate if you come across
those either inconsistencies or deficiencies of the KPIs to
demonstrate the activity. Absolutely, please do. That would be
very useful. Again, I find that the KPIs and formulating them
correctly has helped us make the plan a lot more structured and
more transparently demonstrating the activities that occur and
their outcomes. I think that can be very helpful. If you come
across that, please do provide us that feedback. That would be
really helpful. Next?

Page 14 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

I’m not sure whether that question will get an answer later, but I
see you mentioned of the EFQM program within ICANN. I’d like to
know what’s the status about it. Are you doing external
assessments? Are you planning external assessment, and will
you be in a position – and basically when – to share some
insights about the feedback you’re receiving from that?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you for that question. I’ll provide a more substantive
question. I need to check the timeline with Susanna Bennett, the
COO of ICANN, who oversees the implementation of that
program. We are rolling out the program on a department by
department basis. That has continued over the past few months.
From memory, the external assessment that we’re planning will
be during FY18 if I remember correctly, which will be basically
after three years of implementation and rollout of the plan. I
know you're familiar with it, and I think that's a relatively
consistent timeframe with the methodology of implementation
that EFQM suggests, depending on of course of the size of the
organization and the choices made on the speed of
implementation, as well.
We have tried to be progressive in that rollout. As you all know,
there’s a lot going on in the organization, and it was difficult to
stop a number of other projects in order to make more progress

Page 15 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

on this one. We have tried to continue a steady pace of
implementation so that we keep the momentum, while we
haven’t made it a stop everything and do that type of approach.
I will confirm the timing of that external assessment, and I will
retrieve the roadmap that we have for the project and I will
share that.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

I have a KPI suggestion, very concrete. It is map out a number of
departments of ICANN, indicate the status of deployment across
these departments as part of your KPIs. This is ongoing in seven
out of ten or whatever. We consider it as completed, and so on.
That would be a nice way to see how that program is making
progress.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

I think it’s a very good idea, demonstrating the progress against
that. It’s an operational excellence model, as you know. It’s also
all-encompassing

across

the

organization’s

operational

excellence progress. Thank you for that suggestion. We’ll make a
note of it.
Next, please. We’ll pass that one. It’s some percentages.
Giovanni, since you've gone across all of the comments, as well,

Page 16 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

if there are any that you think we should stop on as well, please
feel free.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

There are a couple of indexes. One is the domain health index,
and if I remember correctly, there is a wish from ICANN to get
more engaged with this working group and the entire ccNSO
community to get more elements to improve or refine this index.
There is a wish that is expressed in the feedback we’ve received.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you. This is an ongoing work that has been taken on by
Cyrus Namazi and his team in the DNS Industry Services to try to
define an index that helps measure the progresses of the area of
responsibility that he has. This has been a result of an
assessment that it was not easy to define individual KPIs that
help cover the entire scope. Therefore, that index was believed
to be measuring the environment that then this group actually
impacts.
It’s a challenging exercise, but the value of it is actually to be
able to bring together the participants of which the ccNSO is of
the domain name industry to be able to define the parameters
that can enter into that index and make it as relevant as possible
to the ICANN environment and, therefore, be able to then

Page 17 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

establish a calculation of that index and then establish a
baseline, of course, and then measure it over time. Of course,
when you do that, as you know, you want to be able to have a
certain amount of stability in the definition of that index
because evolution over time with an index that keeps changing
is not helpful. Defining it well at the outset is something very
important.
What I need to check with Cyrus is the timeframe for the
completion of the first draft of that index because I don’t
remember. That’s something I can also follow up with him. Here,
we’re saying the development of that index continues, but we
don’t have a timeline for completion of a first draft unless I’m
mistaken.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

If I can just say that I believe this working group, as well as all the
ccNSO community – if I can speak on behalf of the ccNSO – we
are always available to provide any help that you may need to
refine this index. If I remember correctly, the discussion goes
back to the time when we were presented some figures about
the domain name growth projections around the globe. We
found them quite inconsistent against the projections we were
having at different regional and continental levels. Again, we
remain available to help you. Mathieu?

Page 18 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

MATHIEU WEILL:

Under the registry stakeholder group list, which I happen to
follow, there’s a lot of discussions. There have been public
comments about draft metrics for the domain health index. Is
that the same index we’re talking about?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

I believe so, yeah.

MATHIEU WEILL:

So probably maybe in a future meeting, we can invite Cyrus or
the people working on this. I know they’ve been doing
workshops with the Registry Stakeholder Group in the GNSO,
but probably it could be worthwhile doing this within the ccNSO,
as well.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

I think that would be great.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

In Marrakech, there was this idea that was launched in this
working group to, as Xavier and his team, they are collecting
input from the different ICANN departments. Some of the
comments that we have submitted over the years, they’re
referring not really to financial figures but also to the content.

Page 19 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

That is a content that is not up to Xavier and his team to produce
but is assembled by Xavier to have some extra clarification on
different areas of the ICANN strategy.
In Marrakech, we launched the idea to have a broader and open
discussion that is going to take place for the first time tomorrow
afternoon. There’s going to be a session with a couple of people
from ICANN different departments who are going to speak more
in details about certain areas about which we submitted
comments over the years.
One of them is the [hub] strategy, so the office strategy of ICANN,
and the other one is HR, so how ICANN is dealing with HR in
terms of evaluation, in terms of hiring processes. Those are just
two of the areas where we had quite a lot of comments over the
years. For the first time tomorrow, there’s going to be this
session tomorrow afternoon at the end of the ccNSO meeting.
It’s almost at the end of the ccNSO first day meeting. There is
this session with some of the people behind those parts of the
strategy.
Again, it would be probably useful in the future to invite Cyrus to
speak about the domain health index and see how it can
contribute.

Page 20 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

BART BOSWINKEL:

There are different ways of doing it, but I think it could be a nice
session in Hyderabad, as well. [Seek] a combined session with
the Registry Stakeholders Group to go over the domain name
health index, and maybe even at the ccNSO meeting itself, so the
[meetings] day. Not just limit it to this group. It’s interesting for
probably the broader community.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Just a compliment to what Giovanni just said about the session
tomorrow. The HR aspect of this discussion will be led by
Susanna Bennett, the COO of ICANN, and the engagement and
[hub] and outreach topics will be presented by Sally Costerton,
head of Global Stakeholder Engagement. Being the people, as
Giovanni indicated, that basically manage those functions at
ICANN and therefore with which a substantive discussion can
happen on understanding how each area is managed in
interacting with each of them, of course. Hopefully, you will all
be able to participate tomorrow afternoon to this first exercise.
Relative to the health index and so on, it sounds to me that
Hyderabad is good timing, as well, because if you remember in
our planning process, it will likely precede the definition of the
revenue assumptions for FY18. Cyrus’s team is the one who
produces those revenue assumptions on the basis of market
trends as well as the specific registry assumptions for ICANN’s

Page 21 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

revenue. This, to me, seems both a good timing and a good
combination of topics at the same time. We’ll follow up on that
together, Bart, with Cyrus.
Any specific questions or comments on the comments that are
here on the screen? We just showed the comment relative to the
industry index, and I see that the response that Cyrus offered is
that there’s a better version of the index expected by the end of
FY16, which is in five days from now. We’ll follow up with him.
There are other industries, as well, that are being developed
across the organization. I think, Patrick, there’s one in GSE as
well, right? It’s a similar approach to creating an index that can
be used as a reference. Of course, the creation of that type of
indices is a relatively complex and broad, for the right reasons. It
also takes a lot of effort to aggregate the data, which is a lot of
manual effort to go and look for it, and then aggregate it in a
structured fashion. But it’s a very healthy exercise to help us
build these metrics.
Patrick will be part of the group tomorrow that will present the
GSE strategy. Patrick?

PATRICK JONES:

In tomorrow’s session, we’ll talk about our approach to
engagement and how we’ve been improving our KPIs and the

Page 22 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

data that we do collect on our engagement activities. We’ll also
include with that the approach to the hub and engagement
office strategy. We’ll provide some explanation that will
complement the response to the public comments that was
provided.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you very much. Next, please. We’re not going in order is
what you're telling me. We’re already on slide 27? Let’s scroll
through. How long do we have?

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

It’s just a matter now of timing. I’m looking at the working group
members. Is there any specific area where you'd like to hear
more from Xavier? I mentioned the indexes that are referred to
in the feedback. It was one point in the agenda and is also
mentioned in our input is how ICANN is now managing the
transition.
I’m in this finance working group list, and I’ve seen there are
some e-mail exchanges regarding the reserve fund and some
comments regarding the reserve fund which is going to be used.
There are also a couple of comments not of the ccNSO SOP
submitted to the Fiscal Year Operating Plan and Budget relating

Page 23 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

to the contingency fund. ICANN doesn’t have a true contingency
fund, so it operates differently.
If Xavier can elaborate a bit more about the reserve fund and the
contingency fund. Again, if anybody else from the working group
has any area of what we have already submitted or any other
area you'd like to hear more from Xavier, I think this is the
moment.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Let me start, and then we’ll gather questions as they come.
There’s been a number of discussions going on relative to the
reserve fund of ICANN and in connection with the IANA
stewardship transition project’s expenses. To try to share the
same information with everyone in this group, the IANA
stewardship transition project has been going on and we’ve
been tracking it from a cost standpoint since July 2014, the
beginning of the fiscal year 15 of ICANN, so FY15, FY16. That’s
now closing. That’s two years of intense activities that have
been more intense over the past year and a half.
We have, as an organization – when I say organization, I mean
the entire community – we have spent approximately $28
million on this project over those two years, FY15 and FY16. The
funding of those expenses was determined to be needed to
come from the reserve fund, simply because we didn’t have the

Page 24 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

money in our annual operating revenue to be able to fund those
expenses from it. It has come from our reserve fund. The reserve
fund at the beginning of this period was $88 million. It’s now
going to be at $60 million once we take out the expenses.
There’s now the expenses for FY17 coming up, which we are
estimating to be short of $9 million. So $60 million at the end of
FY16 in a few days, less $9 million for FY17. That will bring the
reserve fund at about $51 million or so, ignoring investment
gains on the fund.
$51 million, to put this in relation to where do we want this
reserve fund to be, which is currently sent at a 12 months of
operating expenses for the organization as the adequate target
amount for that fund. If we look at the FY17 budget, 12 months
of operating expenses is a $132 million. So $51 million, future
level, compared to $132 million of target. There’s obviously a
problem. This is a concerning problem, not just to me as CFO,
but to the entire community, of course, including the Board.
There’s a lot of work that is going on to, first of all, manage the
expenses of the project as tightly as possible as well as finding
solutions to replenish the reserve fund, basically.
The Board has, separately, carried out a project of reanalyzing
the rationale for the reserve fund and also the target level and
the governance of the reserve fund of which, of course, including
how we replenish this fund?

Page 25 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

A number of mechanisms have been mentioned. Of course, for
example, having an excess generated every year to put money
away, just like a normal savings account. But considering the
gap of $51 to $132 million, using just those numbers, which is
about $82 million, it’s not by putting away $2 million or $3
million every year that we’re get anywhere, or not anywhere
fast.
That’s the problem that is in front of us that the Board and
notably the finance committee, of course, is looking very much
into. The Board has even more than half of its members involved
in the working group that works on the reserve fund target
definition, and we’re expecting this to come out in the next few
weeks. It’s coming to an end, and it’s timely with the challenge
that we have of having this reserve fund being depleted.
We will have very interesting conversations in the next few
weeks and months on how do we replenish this reserve fund. I
want to emphasize that as part of the FY17 budget, the envelope
of nearly $9 million that I mentioned has been included in the
budget and is conditional to the funding has been indicated to
be from the reserve fund as well, but as a temporary measure.
The Board has determined that the funding of that $9 million
would come out of the reserve fund, but until we have
determined a way to replenish the reserve fund and defined a
possibly alternative source of funding for these expenses.

Page 26 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

We will initiate over the next few weeks a process to get input
from the community as to how do we want these expenses to be
funded because we can’t continue to deplete our reserves. We
need to find ways to do that. How long are those expenses going
to last is obviously one big question. How do we fund those
expenses knowing that the reserve fund of ICANN is not there to
fund that type of projects but is there as a safety reserve to face
unknown, unexpected, unavoidable expenses that could occur?
That reserve is actually a fundamental element of the stability of
the organization to carry out its mission. Being in the situation
that we’re in is a very downgraded situation from a stability
standpoint and a very heightened risk situation. This is of very
short term concern.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Stephen?

STEPHEN DEERHAKE:

From your perspective as CFO, how much time do you think we
have as an organization to sort out this reserve question and
how to get it stabilized and built back up? It looks to me like
we’re out on very thin ice in late spring. All it would take is one
adverse legal judgment to wipe out the reserve that we’ve got,
for example.

Page 27 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you, Stephen, for that question. It’s concerning, for sure.
There’s no question. I think that at $50 or so million, we can face
a number of risks, but of course, the issue is always the same. We
don’t know what we don't know. To your point, a significant,
impactful litigation could make a big dent in that $51 million.
Every event that would occur then leaves us very exposed to the
next one. Cyber security is something that we pay a lot of
attention to, but that takes a lot of money to also fight or to
enhance. We know how challenging cyber security is these days,
and it’s a race against the bad guys. It never stops. That’s a
concern, and that would be something that could trigger
relatively easily the need to use the reserve fund.
I think it’s urgent, not necessarily because we are exposed on a
very short term basis, but it’s urgent because we don’t have an
alternative funding for anything. This is the last resort funding
for ICANN. If we don’t have that, we’re completely exposed to
the next event that creates a problem. I think it’s urgent
because, first of all, we keep depleting, and we are depleting
without having a mechanism to replenish. You could argue that
when you don’t have a mechanism to replenish, you don’t
deplete.

Page 28 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

We don’t have a choice. We need to go through the transition.
It’s a fundamentally important project, and it costs money. We
don’t have a choice, but that makes even more so important and
urgent to define the processes to replenish the reserve. To me,
the urgency is more strategic and structural than the result of
immediate risks in the short term. I don't know if that helps you
answering your question. We have Roelof.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Roelof just came in the right moment. It’s like the shark attack.
Can I just say, just to Xavier? I don't know if this exercise was
already conducted. We’re talking about $8.8 million.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

For [FY17].

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Would it have been more prudent for ICANN Board to consider if
and how to optimize current operational costs to see if there is
room to find this $8.8 million, instead of going immediately to
the reserve fund and say, “They are available. There’s a reserve
fund of about $50 million still there. We’ll take them from the
reserve fund,” instead of saying, “Let’s look into the current
operational activities and see if we can save something?” I’m not
saying all of them, but as a message to the community, an effort

Page 29 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

to say, “Let’s try to optimize things so that [half of] that, we take
it from an optimization from current cost and the rest we take it
from the fund,” instead of saying, “We take everything from the
fund.”

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you. It is, and it has. With the BFC and the Board, with we
have looked at what are our possible options. In FY16, we have a
number of initiatives whose funding was to be from the reserve
fund. In addition to the USG, the IANA stewardship transition,
there are six initiatives. In FY16, we won’t have a lot of time to
talk about that, but we will generate an excess versus the
budget. Obviously, this excess will help mitigate the expenses of
the transition.
The budget of FY17 has not been structured to absorb any
fraction of the IANA stewardship transition expenses, but it has
been structured, as I’m sure you have seen, to absorb all the
other initiatives costs. As opposed to FY16 where we have six
projects funded by the reserve fund, in FY17, we’ll have only one.
It’s a significant one, but we’ve already gone through that step
of absorbing into the operations initiatives costs. It’s not like it’s
not happening. It’s happening for the other projects versus and
not this one.

Page 30 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

This is one of the elements for which the BFC and the Board have
asked that basically the funding by the reserve fund is a
temporary measure. As a community in the next few weeks, we
will need to determine whether maybe we want to say, “No. No
reserve fund. We’re going to cut costs.” Cutting costs will mean
cutting activities, so what do we stop to do together so that we
integrate the funding of these expenses into the operational
budget? That’s an alternative that should be considered.
I think this is a completely reasonable analysis and approach.
I’m not saying this will necessarily be the outcome, but as
stewards of the organization, this is what we should be doing.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you. Roelof?

ROELOF MEIJER:

Thank you, Giovanni. Xavier, just to make sure that I understand
the actual exposure, you're talking about the reserve fund, but
there are other funds that ICANN has that have been earmarked
for other purposes. There is a surplus from the new gTLD
exercise, I think, which is somewhere. I’m not trying to diminish
the sense of urgency or suggesting that those funds can easily be
used for that, but if there is a huge disaster, the fund is
replenished. If I’m well informed, then there are two other

Page 31 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

sources where temporarily, funds can be taken from. One is the
new gTLD surplus, and the other one is gTLD auction revenues,
right? That is cash that is available for ICANN if that is necessary,
isn’t it?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you. We are happy that you bring up this topic, which is
the beginning of a really interesting conversation to be had.

ROELOF MEIJER:

And that was without a briefing.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

But we’re among friends.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[Can I] close the door?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Yeah, I think it’s time to close the door. First, I just want to
requalify one thing that you said. The new gTLD program, as you
know, is self-funded through the application fees. There are
expenses that have been incurred to the extent of approximately
$250 million. The program is not finished. It continues. It’s of
course, in terms of volume, dying down with the remaining

Page 32 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

applications. There’s about 40 or 50 remaining applications, but
there’s also risks associated with that program.

ROELOF MEIJER:

Sorry to interrupt, Xavier. My suggestion was not to go into that
discussion if that will be a rightful move or not. I want to steer far
away from that. I’m sure it was meant as a yes or no question.
Maybe I should rephrase it.
Am I correct to understand that on the bank accounts that
ICANN manages, there are funds which are earmarked for other
purposes and should continue to be earmarked for other
purposes, but that ICANN has access to if some kind of disaster
occurs? The complete reserve fund is replenished. The current
banking account is back on zero, and now you have to do
something, either go to the bank and borrow or use other funds
that you have earmarked for other things.

[XAVIER CALVEZ]:

[You can’t just] ask the question without me [adding it in].

ROELOF MEIJER:

There’s always a possibility of answering yes or no.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

I will provide my answer, and I’m not an engineer.

Page 33 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

ROELOF MEIJER:

I’ll accept the third option: I don’t know.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

We don’t yet know if there will be a surplus for the new gTLD
program, but to the question, do we have cash on the bank
accounts today, we can show you exactly how much there is. It’s
very easy to do. There is remaining funds for the new gTLD
program today of approximately $150 million not yet spent,
though with expected expenses in the future. There’s $101
million of auctions proceeds on the bank accounts of the
organization. Those two funds are funds, to your point, that is
earmarked, but that are cash owned by the organization. If there
would be an extraordinary set of circumstances that in the very
short term make us have need for more than $80 million of cash,
which is the combination of the reserve fund and the operating
fund, then we would more likely than not dip into those funds on
a very temporary basis.
Yes, there is cash available on the bank accounts of the
organization.

ROELOF MEIJER:

Page 34 of 51

And quickly counted, it’s about $300 million altogether.

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

XAVIER CALVEZ:

A bit more. $340 million.

ROELOF MEIJER:

So just to make sure that we know how exposed ICANN is.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you. I have Allan and then Mathieu and then Barrack.

ALLAN MACGILLIVRAY:

Thank you, Giovanni. I’d like to ask Xavier a related question.
You indicated the Board has commenced a process for looking
at options to replenish the reserve fund. I thought that’s what
you indicated already. It’s a premise to my question.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Let me precise it, then. The Board has initiated, outside of the
transition nearly two years ago, a process to review the target
level of the reserve fund. What should it be? It’s therefore
worked on establishing a rationale and an objective for that
reserve fund, so a target level and a governance mechanism,
which includes replenishment. What do you do when you're

Page 35 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

short? What do you do when you've arrived at it? And so on. A
policy, basically, for that purpose.
Obviously, when you get to that point and you define a target
level that's above the current balance, then you need to look at
replenishment, as well. Though the replenishment is an ongoing
current discussion, it’s not yet formulated solutions. We believe
this is something that needs to be done with the community, as
well.

ALLAN MACGILLIVRAY:

I’d like just to put in context there will have to be a process for
looking at options by the Board to replenish the reserve fund.
There’s also a process ongoing with respect to the disbursement
of the auction proceeds. I’m sure making this linkage will not be
a surprise to you. How do those two processes line up in terms of
decision making? That’s my question. I certainly wouldn’t want
to see one process end prematurely, even though that’s a
pejorative term. I think there has to be a recognition in terms of
the timing those two processes. We wouldn’t want to see, for
example, some decisions on the auction proceeds taken in
advance of potentially some very difficult decisions on the
replenishment of the reserve. Maybe there might be some value
in aligning the decision making so all options are examined at
the same time. Thank you.

Page 36 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you. My very insightful prediction is that we will be done
with the reserve fund governance before we will be done with
knowing how the auction fund proceeds are going to be spent.
They are not lining up. That’s a challenge. I’ll come to your
question, Debbie. It’s a challenge in the exercise of looking at
replenishment options that if some would consider that the
auction proceeds are a source of possible replenishment of the
reserve fund, those having those ideas would need to find ways
to provide those ideas as an element in contribution to the
working group that works on auction proceeds disbursements. I
hope that helps answering that question.

ALLAN MACGILLIVRAY:

Just a small point. It’s not so much the source of funds, but they
have to appreciate the consequences of that. In other words, if
ICANN were to say, “We have to cut all travel funding for the AC
community in order to replenish. That’s the only option,” I think
that decision would have to be taken into account if someone’s
looking at the disbursement of the auction proceeds.
I can see initially people saying, “No, don’t touch them. They’re
meant for something else,” so I’m encouraging the Board to put
those options forward so that we can have a broader discussion

Page 37 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

because obviously we’re facing some very difficult choices.
Thank you.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

I’ll come back to that, but there’s I think Mathieu and Debbie.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Following up because then I have a comment and a suggestion,
but it’s just a suggestion. I don’t see how this discussion on the
reserve fund targets and ways of refurbishing whatever can be
held outside of the strategic plan discussions. This is where it
belongs. It needs to be in this decision making process, and it is
central to the strategy of ICANN that it stays a financially stable
organization. That’s where it belongs.
There’s also an option, which I hope is being considered and I’m
bringing it to the table. You don’t have to react about it, but if
you are aiming at one year expenses as a target, one way of
replenishing is cutting costs. I hope that the one-time projects,
the ones that are not going to be recurring within ICANN but are
related to extraordinary circumstances – I think you know which
projects I’m referring to –

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Page 38 of 51

Thank you, Mathieu. Thank you. Thank you.

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

MATHIEU WEILL:

– are not integrated into the target because the associated
expenses are designed to go away in the future, taking into
account the extra expenses recurring.
Finally, this is more of a message to the CCs around the table. I
want to stress that there is currently in front of the council a
proposal about the draft budget for Work Stream 2 on the
accountability track, which is very significant. It’s roughly $8
million. I think it would be good if the ccNSO would have a
discussion around it at some point because it is not just pure
rubber stamping. It needs to be discussed about the value for
money around this.
That’s it.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you, Mathieu. There is also Barrack and then Debbie.
Barrack, please.

BARRACK OTIENO:

Mine is just a suggestion. I was thinking, given the extraordinary
circumstances that have been brought by the transition, I don’t
see why the new gTLD auction proceeds cannot be used for the
reserve fund. When I look at the draft paper that was proposed,

Page 39 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

it talks of such funds as reserves. In the absence of us putting
them in the reserve fund that we’re talking about, it will mean
that we have two reserves, which puts us in another quagmire.
Just a proposal.

DEBBIE MONAHAN:

My question comes down to, you said before, Xavier, that you're
looking at reviewing the reserves policy. That, to me, is a key
step because if you turn around and actually say, “We only need
six months’ operating plus the key expenses or contracts that we
have to pay out,” before you set your criteria to a [wind down] in
the worst situation or what you truly need, the degree of
replenishment could be quite different. If you, for example,
move to six months and you only need to find $10 million, which
is quite different to actually having to find them more.
The timetable for that review of the reserves, and how is the
community potentially going to be involved in that discussion?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you. If you don’t mind, I’ll start back over from the
commenters. Allan was pointing out the timing of the processes
relative to auction proceeds disbursements and the reserve
fund. Definitely, we will need to consider, and I think it’s natural
to consider and to have input into the auction proceeds process

Page 40 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

to introduce the possibility that this is one of the purposes that
could be used for those auction funds proceeds.
That’s also Barrack’s point. I’m hoping that this input can come
across from you guys in the future, at the time appropriate when
those discussions will happen. One of my objectives is to make
sure that they do happen.
I completely agree with Mathieu that the evaluation of the
reserve fund and its target and its level should be done in the
perspective of the strategic plan. This is the way to look at what
the needs are for this reserve fund and how important it is. I was
simply talking about the stability of the organization. This is the
most significant financial element of the stability of the
organization.
To get to your point, Debbie, I’m expecting that the process that
the Board has initiated to look at the rationale, the target level,
and the governance of the reserve fund will be concluded in the
sense of producing a draft in the next few weeks and then can be
brought to the community for discussion and input then.
We have discussed with the Board by the end of the July to have
defined the process to share the information with the
community and engage the community. We need to finalize
those documents. There’s a lot of things happening between
now and the end of July, but we need to finalize all the

Page 41 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

documents that support the outcome of this working group from
the Board. In the weeks that follow, then we would engage the
community on that, and in parallel, the topic of how do we fund
these expenses of $8.8 million that are in front of us for FY17.
I’ll share information out of the discussions with the Board. The
Board was on the fence of not wanting to budget for those
expenses, at least not fully, because of this funding issue. Where
do we fund it from? There’s been a compromise found in the
sense of, “Let’s put these costs for the budget into the budget for
the full year, but the funding of it will need to be determined
basically by Hyderabad.”
Over the next three or four months, we’re going to need to work
together on how do we fund those expenses, which obviously is
connected with the level of the reserve fund. This is an
important conversation to be had over the next few weeks.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you, Xavier. Are we more or less happy to be anticipated
that we’ll be heavily consulted in the coming months about how
to help [inaudible] a sort of fund strategy?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Yes, but there’s also for you an opportunity to participate in the
auction proceeds working group.

Page 42 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

[I thought] [inaudible] in the auctions.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Sorry?

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

I thought you were going to stop in the auctions, to participate
in the auction process.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

You can participate in the auctions if you want, as well.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible] [proceeds].

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Sorry? Yeah. Because that working group will be working on
defining the mechanisms to allocate those funds. What we
would like to see emerging is that replenishment of the reserve
fund may be a purpose that's spelled out for the auction
proceeds as part of that working group, but it will only happen if
the community suggests it.

Page 43 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

BART BOSWINKEL:

Just as a remark from a ccNSO council perspective, at the time
when they were asked to participate, they declined to
participate. The main reason was – there were some very
fundamental reasons – they did not participate in the auction
proceeds themselves. Therefore, it’s not the role of the ccNSO to
define the spending of it, as well. That’s the ccNSO council
perspective. It doesn’t mean therefore there has been no call for
volunteers, etc., going out. That doesn’t mean individual ccTLDs.
They have their own views, etc.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you, Bart, for this clarification. We need to wrap up this
working group session, so I’d just like to give the floor to Xavier
for a couple of words regarding the next steps, so the plan for
Fiscal Year 17 Operating Plan and Budget is to be approved by
the Board when?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

It has been approved.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

It has?

Page 44 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

XAVIER CALVEZ:

It has been approved. I need to remember the days because it’s
already far away. Two days ago.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Has the consolidated plan been published?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

When you say consolidated plan, what do you mean?

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Consolidated plan, is that on many of the comments of the
different stakeholder groups, the response from ICANN was that
the Fiscal Year 17 would have been integrated with extra details
of feedback or clearer figures before being approved.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

The responses to the public comments that indicated that
changes or clarifications would be made? These changes or
clarifications have been made into the final plan. We have
briefed the Board, not necessarily on an individual detail
comment basis, but we’ve explained to the Board that there
were a number of comments that required clarification, that we
had proceeded with making those clarifications in the final plan.
The plan was that submitted for Board approval two days ago is
the one that integrated those comments.

Page 45 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

The final document with those changes will be published very
shortly, and it has a section at the beginning that lists all the
changes that have been made in relation to those public
comments and the responses that we have published on June
6th.
We need to publish it imminently, and there’s also the five-year
operating plan update that will be published, as well.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

At procedural level, would it have been better as there were
several integrations and information that had to be inputted in
the final plan to publish the consolidated before being
approved?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

The way we are trying to do something along those lines is to
publish the responses to the public comment as early as
possible and as much in advance as possible of the approval of
the budget. That’s why we published the responses that we
went over a little bit today 20 days ago on the 6th of June, so that
there is a bit of time for the community to look at those
responses and see how adequate or not they are.
The part that is just simply logistically overchallenging at this
stage is that integrating, making the changes to both plans –

Page 46 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

we’re talking about 140 pages approximately of plan – do not let
us enough time between the end of the public comment period,
the response period, and the publication of those comments to
turn around a final draft version of the plan, put it out for
community input in sufficient time that if we get community
input, then we integrate that input, we change the plan again,
and then we submit it to the Board. This just doesn’t fit.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Xavier, it’s not to have a second round of comments, just to say
this is the final product that goes to the Board for approval. That
is what I’m saying.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

So your point would be that once we’ve made the changes, prior
to the Board …

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Yeah, this is what I mean.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Publishing it?

Page 47 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Yeah because currently the Board has approved a document
that the community has not seen in its final version. It’s not
again to open a second round of comments. It’s just to, as a
matter of transparency and engaging with the community, to
present to the community the plan and then saying, “This is
going to be approved in two days, three days, or one hour,
whatever.”

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Is that not part of the process at the moment? When you have
the version that you're going to submit to the Board for
approval, that you send that out to the community just to inform
them? “This is the plan. This is going to the Board. If all is well,
this is what it’s going to be?”

XAVIER CALVEZ:

No, we have not done that yet.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Okay. Maybe that's something for the meeting with the Board.
We can see if they would agree with that because, like Giovanni
says, it’s a polite way of dealing with the community after
they’ve taken the trouble to comment on the drafts.

Page 48 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

XAVIER CALVEZ:

I find the idea very sensible. Again, the way we’ve tried to
address that is to publish the responses. The responses indicate
what changes we’re going to make. When you aggregate the
changes with the draft, you have an idea of the final, but I
completely recognize what you're saying. Showing what the
final is would be a nice conclusion of that interaction process.
I will discuss that with the BFC. Just so that you understand,
there’s a bit also the challenge, not that it’s insurmountable,
that until the Board has approved it, could change. It’s not
usually the plan that it changes because it’s become a final one,
but that will challenge in the process. I will discuss with the BFC,
offering that idea and see what their reaction is. I don’t have any
specific issue, other than that timing process issue at the end of
the period, that we make that happen. We produced that final
draft for the Board in advance of their meeting. We produced it
on the 14th, I think. We sent it to the Board so that the Board has
enough time. They have hundreds of pages of documents to
review before the Board meeting happens. We provide them
documents, ideally at a minimum ten days in advance of the
Board meeting. We did obviously produce that final budget by
that time, and I think it was on the 13th or 14th that we submitted
to the Board operations team.

Page 49 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

It is available a few days before, and it could be shared,
technically speaking, with the community, saying, “Heads up.
This is what's going to be approved by the Board, or not.”

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

I understand the time constraints because I think it goes into
operation on the 1st of July, right?

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

To wrap up this working group session, first of all, I think we
have well covered. One point of the agenda was the next steps.
To summarize the next steps now that the plan is approved, I
think we are all looking forward to see the final plan published,
first of all, and secondly to receive the feedback and follow up
that ICANN committed to provide to the community in the
responses to the various comments that were put forward by the
different stakeholder groups.
In terms of this working group, again, I would like to highlight
that tomorrow, at the end of the ccNSO session first day of
meeting of the ccNSO, there is this session starting at 5:00. It’s in
Veranda 2, so the room close to this one. It’s a session chaired by
Xavier. I will be the moderator, and we have two guest speakers,
Susanna Bennett and Sally Costerton. They will speak about two
areas about which this working group comments several times

Page 50 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – SOP Working Group

over the past years, and are mainly the [hub] and office strategy
and HR from the ICANN perspective with different details
regarding the hiring process, everything that we commented
through these years.
In terms of this working group, I was quite happy with the way
the working group functioned against the comments we
submitted to ICANN Fiscal Year 17 Operating Plan and Budget. I
think that the vision in sub-working groups continues to work
well. I don't know if anybody likes to say something about the
sub-working groups, but I think the production or the different
comments work well. Thanks again to all of you who contributed
and to those who cannot be with us today.
That said, is there any other business you'd like to discuss or any
final questions to Xavier and his team that I would like again to
think for the availability and also their dedication and
commitment to exchange with us as many information as
possible about the processes and figures and much more. Any
last questions? Comments? No? Okay. I officially declare this
session closed. Thank you, everybody. Thank you.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 51 of 51

