ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 1

Transcription ICANN Helsinki
Internet Service Providers and Connectivity Providers Constituency
Monday, 27 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at

The recordings and transcriptions of the calls are posted on the GNSO Master Calendar
page http://gnso.icann.org/en/group-activities/calendar

Rajesh Chharia:

Hi. I'm Rajesh Chharia, President ISP Association of India and duly appointed
Executive Consulate Secretary of APNIC. Welcome.

Christian Dawson: I'm Christian Dawson. I am with the Internet Infrastructure Coalition.
Malcolm Hutty:

Malcolm Hutty, LINX, the London Internet Exchange with EurolSPA, for the
Pan-European Association for Internet Services Providers in the EU and
European economic area.

Tony Holmes:

Okay thank you very much. If we could just quickly go on in the back row that
would be helpful if I could just ask you quickly.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 2

(Joseph Alberg): Hello. My name is (Joseph Alberg) from Elisa Corporation, local Finnish ISP.
(Careit Oala):

(Careit Oala). I'm a Minister of Transport Communications.

(Deplus Karfiet): (Deplus Karfiet) from domain in Europe.club. We are the users of your
services.
Tony Holmes:

And we very much appreciate you. Thank you. Okay so to get into the
agenda that's circulated we do have a couple of issues to pick up under AOB
but we'll do that at the end. We'll need probably five minutes or so for that.
Tony, sorry.

Tony Harris:

I'd like to present a motion that we congratulate Akinori on his election.

((Crosstalk))
Tony Holmes:

And (unintelligible).

Tony Harris:

We've done that. We've done that Tony.

Tony Holmes:

Well I congratulate you then because I was late.

Tony Holmes:

Thank you. Okay so the first series of issues we have are around this
meeting for ICANN 56. And a number of people were at the Workstream 2
meeting on Sunday. So I'm going to open the floor up for comments because
this is certainly going to come up as a discussion point as we go through the
next few days. So if I could ask Alain perhaps and Olivier to bring us up to
date with where we are now after the discussions on Sunday. Thank you.

Alain Bidron:

Thank you Tony. Yes there was a four day meeting yesterday on the
Workstream 2 accountability, where a few from the SPA community attending
this meeting. (Unintelligible) was a - Malcolm was here, Olivier and myself,
maybe (unintelligible) was attending part of the meeting or the meeting I

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 3

think. For those who don't know on accountability is a work positive
(unintelligible) to stream or Workstream 1 which was dealing with
accountability measures that had to be put in place before the (unintelligible)
happened on the Workstream 2 dealing with actions that could wait until after
the transition and be addressed after the transition or that was not necessary
to implement a transition.
So Workstream 1 was achieved in Marrakesh and Workstream 2 was
prepared between Marrakesh in this meeting. And the meeting yesterday was
the first (record) meeting of the Workstream 2. What will be changing and
Workstream 2 in comparison with Workstream 1 regarding members and
participants I don't see (unintelligible) and observers. There is no major
change. We have members that were appointed to the working group by the
community, the chartering organization. And my understanding is that people
that were appointed will continue to follow this to be members of this working
group. But wouldn't need to be a member to participate. You can participate
as a participant. So in this thing you have to do is to feel a (unintelligible) of
interest and register with the ICANN staff to able to purchase it to attend the
meetings, to attend the conference call and to express your views.
The only real difference between participant and members is the same than
with Workstream 1. If we raise from all the votes only members has to vote.
But we tried to reach consensus and it will not able to - something that was
not needed in Workstream 1. Second different is that participants normally
are that is funded, that traveling is funded, no members said traveling is
funded. Participants traveling is not but otherwise there is no difference.
So you can participate. Of course you can register and participate in this
working group. And this is something very interesting in my view. What was
addressed yesterday as the – is a pending proposal work what we need then
to do. What was mentioned yesterday is the is the - is a new way of working.
With Workstream 1 is a work that's really divided into different topics. Now it's
different. Nine topics were identified and so where there will be some

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 4

subgroup for addressing each of those nine topics. So topic diversity in
human rights, jurisdiction, (unintelligible) manners, SO AC accountability,
staff accountability, transparency, reviewing the CEP, CEP for Comparative
Engagement Process. And my understanding this is a face to face
negotiation before prior to an IRP process. So they will be reviewing that. And
(unintelligible) for standard vote conduct. This is in nine topics. And each of
those topics will be addressed in the specific working group.
So is a request now to register as participant of each of those working groups
or as an of observer. The difference between participant and observer of
participant can post on the mailing list. Observer has no right to post on the
mailing list as they receive the mailing list but don't post. So if you want to
express a view you have to be registered as participant into a working group.
What was discussed yesterday is a proposal to prioritize what Workstream 2
topics into simpler lighter topics, intermediate topics and topics that lead take
a long time to reach consensus. So there was a proposal. Even if a working
group we will be working in parallel that it's is necessary to prioritize in order
to save time.
There was a suggested timeline. The plan is this month's during that meeting
to agree on subgroups. But I think it's already agreed in my view. The first
discussion with the CWG Workstream 2 will be in August 16. So we will be
starting very quickly. On October the plan is to have - to agree for public input
and to have a public input period, the first public input period between the
20th of October and the 3rd of November in order for exhibiting thereabout to
receive some first feedback. The plan is to analyze public comments in
December 2016 to refine the proposal of the comments in January 2017 and
to add the first reports in February 2017 for simpler issues or by mid-2017 at
the latest. So the plan is finish its work, finish the work for working to around
June 2017 but it could take longer.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 5

What can I say? Yesterday it - there was also a way to brainstorm on the
issues. And people were – some people are to provide some lightning talks.
Lightning talks were short presentation made as a way to brainstorm and
generate ideas. And it was a very interesting lightening talks specifically on
diversity, on human rights and on (unintelligible) election. Among the nine
teams that were selected I think there is one attracting is the most
participants was (unintelligible) already resisted in the subgroup. And this is
one diversity (unintelligible) and jurisdiction.
So we are an early stage. And if you are interested please register. Please
participate. It is pretty open.
Tony Holmes:

Thank you very much Alain. So open for comment Wolf-Ulrich.

Wolf-Ulrich Knoben: Wolf-Ulrich speaking. Thanks Alain and the other members or participants
of that group. So if you look at nine issues, nine working teams, sub teams
normally you know nobody can cover that right? And so the question for me
is from your point of view for the participants in Workstream 2 are you – do
you have any recommendations or what is most interesting to our group? So
for example SO AC accountability I think that there is one point I would say.
But the others I'm not sure about it. Do we have any recommendations? So
and then we could try to find out how to share that work. Thanks.
Alain Bidron:

Yes it's possible that some works. So if it won't be part – I want to dedicate
some time to participate in these working groups. So we are to select the
one. There is a way to select so one where you think you have some ideas to
bring we are more (unintelligible). But also we have to select these working
group with the idea to have enough participant in single working group. So
even if your choice is diversity if you think you can bring some good idea for
your other groups diversity is already very, very well. There is a lot of people
having – expressing (unintelligible) as a group in diversity and human
(unintelligible) relation. So if you can resist actual to one of the other groups it
would be very, very much welcome.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 6

(Unintelligible) ideas is that as ICP members we can cannot cover everything.
But we can show the – bears the load and shares a load to try to see if we
can cover the maximum of those working groups and share together to the
ideas and inputs. So that's going to be an idea to be efficient.
Myself I have already registered as a participant in diversity and jurisdiction. I
know that it's Malcolm has also already registered in some working groups. I
don't remember which one but…
Malcolm Hutty:

(Unintelligible).

Alain Bidron:

Yes Olivier also.

Man:

(Unintelligible).

Alain Bidron:

And I know so as what Wolf-Ulrich you have also registered in one or two
working groups already.

Wolf-Ulrich Knoben: Did I?
Alain Bidron:

I think so. I've seen your name. So it's okay. Does it respond to your question
Wolf-Ulrich.

Wolf-Ulrich Knoben: My question is so if you have - you are very much involved already so you
have recommendations which course we – which issues we could put aside
more or less, you know, because they may be not of so important interest to
our group and others which are more of interest and which are not covered
yet by anybody of us. So if that – if you could help us to find out, you know,
then we can talk about, you know, how to cover the remaining months. We
are still lacking people we want to hear from. Thanks.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 7

Alain Bidron:

There's a quick risk onto that because it really it – each - it is (unintelligible)
as it's interesting. So I don't think there is a single group whereas as ASPs
we are not interested at all.

Tony Holmes:

No I totally agree with that Alain and it's something we need to discuss
because there is a need to have coordination and for us to track each of
these working groups. And it's how we engage in – how we spread ourselves
around. There's a bigger issue as well I think. And that is that we need to
have some CSG coordination on this as well. So that has to be a topic for
when we meet with them.
One of the things I was going to pick up on under AOB but it's probably
appropriate to mention it now is that we have the use of a pop up room facility
as ISPs. It's on Wednesday and it's 9:15 to 10:15. We have another hour for
ISP CP discussions. So I know it – there's an overlap on the agenda but
wedging things into this particular schedule has proved difficult.
One of the items that we need to discuss when we get together on
Wednesday - and that meeting also is in Veranda 1 as I mentioned 9:15 to
10:15 that should be part of our discussion at that meeting, how we're going
to engage and go forward and what are the key things as well as I'm aware
that Malcolm has certainly had some thoughts on some of the issues around
that. I think we need to spend some time discussing that and get in some
initial focus as to where we engage as a constituency and what are the key
elements of the arguments that we need to put forward. So we should do that
on Wednesday morning. Are there any particular comments at this stage on
that point?
Okay so if not I'm going to move on to the second item that was under this
heading. And that is the CSG open meeting that takes place on Wednesday.
It's in Hall B. Again it's quite a tight schedule. It's from 8 o'clock to 9:15. And
there is a lot on the agenda for that meeting.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 8

And just to run through what those issues are for people who may not be
aware there's going to be some discussion about policy coordination and the
three processes underway. I think that's where we can also raise a reference
to this last discussion and how we coordinate on these particular issues that
we've just discussed. We're also going to talk about how we move forward in
terms of Workstream 2 coordination and transition across the piece. The
second item is one that's been initiated that's been discussed a lot within this
constituency and its auction proceeds. And I know Tony has shared some
thoughts with us on that. Again we haven't had any real discussions on the
detail around the work that's going on regarding auction proceeds at the CSG
level. So that again is something that we need to feed some initial thinking
into. I don't know whether you want to say anything on that now Tony just
before we have that CSG meeting.
Tony Holmes:

Yes just to mention that we're actually - the procedure right now is part of the
drafting team which is drawing up the terms of reference the charter for the
working group which will be convened. And once the working group is
convened they will actually begin to define the possible uses for these funds.
We're talking about more than $200 million and of course there's a queue I
think it extends from Finland back to Greece or something of people
interested in using that very productively. So I t- that should be an interesting
process. But right now we're just drafting the charter.

Tony Holmes:

Okay thanks. The third item on that agenda is what we've referred to as
GNSO moving forward into the new era as well. And that's going to be quite a
hot topic here because there is a proposal that basically came from the IPC
initially. But it's going to be discussed in this meeting as to whether and how
we can take it forward as a Commercial Stakeholder group which is a
proposal about the creation of the GNSO ExCom. And there is a (fear)
around that counsel currently is dealing with a lot of issues which aren't
specific to gTLD policy a far wider range of issues. And maybe council isn't
the best way to do that. There may be another way that the GNSO has to
come together. I think there's a motion going into the council meeting on this

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 9

issue as well for this meeting. So there'll be some discussion around that.
We're also going to talk about the GNSO futures work which is something
that's been running in the non-contracted party’s house basically chaired
between (Rudy) and I, (Rudy) from the noncommercial side of our house.
And there's a set in the agenda where we're going to have an NCPH focus
section to bring people up to date where we are, what's happened in that
group and where we go from the future. There will also be an opportunity to
comment and make contributions that will shape the direction that that work
actually goes in.
And following on from that is a related discussion around the GNSO review
that was undertaken. Where do we go with that now in terms of short term
requirements and short term recommendations that come out of that and then
the longer term recommendations as well?
And then a final point on a very tight schedule is some discussion around the
issue of the GAC liaison from the GNSO. Wolf-Ulrich is there anything you
wanted to say on that? I don't know whether there's been any more thoughts
or discussions since this ICANN meeting but that was an open issue when
we arrived here.
Wolf-Ulrich Knoben: Yes Tony, Wolf-Ulrich speaking. This is on the agenda also for council I
think so because it's about the process on selecting the candidate for this
liaison. You know, that was implemented I think two years ago to a liaison
between GAC and a GNSO and Mason Cole with that job until now. So the
first call for interest which was sent out in June or in May even I think so the
evidence was not that much which was expected yes because - and there
may be different reasons of that. So the outcome of all this discussion is right
now that it was postponed until the annual general meeting of this year
because then there will be a change of membership in different groups. And
may be some people have then more time to apply for that job.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 10

So that is decided while that's we – and a new liaison will take place from the
AGM of this year. And the procedure well to find it out and do the criteria of
that that is stipulate down during the next time. So it is under discussion. And
I think so why it's on the agenda of this year's G is because well there is an
interest of several stakeholder groups and the other constituencies also to
maybe to nominate somebody from there. And this is – there was some
discussion on how to do that and this is topic is on the agenda in order to
coordinate a little bit on the CSG level. That's it so far.
Tony Holmes:

Okay. Thank you. Any questions from that? Everyone's aware of the issue
around that. Okay the final thing I want to cover of the third point on this
particular agenda item is that we'll also have a meeting on Wednesday
between the Commercial Stakeholder Group and the contracted party’s
house. Now this is quite unique because we've never had that meeting
before. It's a long, long overdue. And we have three items that have been
identified on that agenda.
The first one is that about guiding the GNSO into the new era, the post
transition and the issues that come out of that. And some of the focus of that
will be on identifying the difference in the role of the GNSO and how we
interact with that. It also relates back of course to the specific proposal about
forming potentially a GNSO ExCom or some other type of means or way of
actually facilitating a discussion on a bullet to set of issues rather than doing it
through council. And I said yes there is no agreement on that. It's just an idea
that's being spun out that is going to get a lot of attention here and there's
going to be a lot of dialogue around that point. So it will be interesting when
we actually meet with the contracted parties house to see if they share that
sort of approach or even recognize that there is an issue there in exactly the
same way.
The last item that's on the agenda for that session and again just within now
it's going to be difficult to I think to quickly cover some of these things but it's
going to be around the proposal to send a letter to ICANN from the GNSO

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 11

constituencies on the issue of public meetings and some of the issues that
have arisen would be cancellation of now of the venues and what was the
thinking behind that what is the strategy from ICANN, how did they come to
make that decision. A draft of that letter has been circulated that's – I think it
was drafted in by the BC. But it came about because initially there was
thoughts that there should be questions asked around that from the
contracted party’s house. Tony over to you.
Tony Harris:

I think I was part of similar letter sent by the Latin American community where
average at having two meetings canceled in the region the same year. And
basically as this letter does point out something which we said at that time.
And that is that the meetings seem to be canceled without any consultation
with organizations or stakeholders why should we live and work in the area?
So I mean yes exactly. It was sort of a decision taken by ICANN without
involving the stakeholders who are in the region or in the country involved
which doesn't seem very logical because people who were living and working
in the region are probably more aware of the risks and if they will exist or not.
And this point was also raised in the BC letter. I just wanted to mention that.
Thank you.

Tony Holmes:

Okay so that will be an interesting debate, I'm sure. Yes please?

Man 2:

(Unintelligible). To whom is the letter addressed?

Tony Holmes:

The – it's a draft letter at the moment and it would go to the ICANN board.

Man 2:

Can I suggest a better audience would be your – and I say that simply
because the board doesn't actually engage in the location decisions or any of
the factors that go into I think concerns that are being raised. The
(unintelligible) employee looks at it from a financial standpoint ensures that
the costs are in line with, you know, budget and with prior meetings and that
due diligence was done on you know, sort of the economic component of it,
not the location itself. So that's probably a better starting point is to send it to

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 12

(Yuri). And then if that doesn't get resolved then certainly there's an appeal
process there for, you know, to come back to the board to indicate you don't
think (Yuri)'s doing his job.
Tony Holmes:

Thanks. I think it is an interesting issue as well because I assume that
whatever comes out of that group has to be endorsed at board as a board will
be - board agreement is that not correct?

Man 2:

You mean from a location decision, no. (Scott) makes the decision locations.
The board simply looks at it like I said from a fiduciary standpoint.

Tony Holmes:

Malcolm?

Malcolm Hutty:

I think what is being asked for in this letter is there should be more policies to
govern the choice on these matters and there should be more clarity about
how those policies should be developed and about how they're implemented.
That sounds like a board decision issued to me. It sounds like asking for the
board to set a clearer framework for the staffs to implement. So to that - I
mean if you were just simply asking the staff to do their work a bit differently
then a letter to staff seems appropriate, more essentially appropriate. But
given what's being asked for here it strikes me that it's a board issue.

Man 2:

Yes that adds a slightly different color to it and I would totally agree with you.
If it's about why the decisions were made around specifically these two
cancels that's a staff question I think should be – perhaps there's two
sections right, one that's addressed to that and so there's a clear explanation.
And then secondly like if there's a request to how to we change the process
and is there a new way we want to do this and that – you're right, that would
be a good board consideration.

Tony Holmes:

And I think the outcome of this is probably that it should be focused towards
both of those entities as well is the right thing so we'll make sure that
happens. Thanks.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 13

Man 2:

Well maybe it's addressed jointly.

Tony Holmes:

Yes. Yes I – points well taken. Thank you. Okay so we've managed to get
through the agenda roughly in time so far as to where we are. And the next
thing on this agenda is the ICANN accountability and the IANA stewardship
transition. And of course after many, many hours of work and hard labor by
the community which it has been an absolutely fantastic effort we managed to
reach consensus on a proposal. That proposal was endorsed at board level.
And we're very pleased I think to hear that it's also proved acceptable to
NTIA. The issue as to where that goes now is somewhat open to debate still
in the US more than anywhere else. So against that background I'll ask
Christian to bring us up to date as to where we are from that perspective.

Christian Dawson: Thank you very much. I appreciate it. I have spent a lot of time over the past
month or so up on Capitol Hill trying to talk with many of the people in the US
Senate and the House of Representatives about the work that we have done
here and why it is good. So specifically Senator Ted Cruz and a
congressman named (Sean Duffy) came up with this particular bill called the
Protecting Internet Freedom Act and they're trying very hard to push the
Protecting Internet Freedom Act. I think that some of you actually may have
seen a video that Ted Cruz put out just a couple of days ago where he talked
about how President Obama was giving the Internet away to Russia and
China.
Man:

YouTube?

Christian Dawson: I believe it is on YouTube but you can go see it. And that's the framing that
their giving to the general public within the United States. Ultimately we have
been doing a good deal of outreach to the community of jurisdiction in the
Senate where this bill is first. That's Chairman Thune of the Committee on
Commerce and ranking member Bill Nelson. And we've been talking to them
about how they shouldn't bring this bill to a vote. We've been specifically

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 14

talking to a number of congressmen about why they don't want to sign on to
this particular piece of legislation in - on the House side. And we've made the
case that especially to the congressmen that have good technical (butafides)
that it will be a black guy for them if they go ahead and support this bill.
The thing is that of any of the groups there in the US that have a good deal of
influence the one that is pushing hardest is the Heritage Foundation. The
Heritage Foundation has actually changed their position pretty dramatically
from one in which they were fully opposed for transition to one in which they
now say, "Let's wait. Let's give it two years. Let's see how this plays out and
whether we can take the training wheels off in about two years." So they've
gone from saying it's a bad idea to seeing - saying that it's an idea that just
needs two years of delay.
So we've been talking about the problems with delay to a lot of these
congressional members and seeing whether – and trying to move them off
that position. I spoke directly with a certain Texas legislator just a couple of
days ago and he said I totally understand what it is you guys are doing. I
totally understand why – how impressive it is that you have come to this
nexus. But you have to understand I want to get reelected and this is a very
big – I read this – be that catalyst. And the idea that we can move Obama off
of this position is something that my constituents would love to see me
support. I'm not saying I will but they would love to see me support. So you
understand my position now. He has not taken a position this particular
congressmen I talked to. But he told me face to face, "Here's what I'm up
against, craven political machinations." So that's where we stand at the
moment.
At the end of the day I think that the Protecting Internet Freedom Act ends up
moving forward it will be vetoed by President Obama. So I'm not sure how
much we need to fight this battle except that we really want as clean a
transition as we possibly can get. And the way that we do that is to not have
to deal with this. So anyway that's my update at the moment.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 15

Tony Holmes:

Thanks Christian, craven political machinations? I think we've heard of that
over the last few days a few times.

Tony Harris:

I have a question.

Tony Holmes:

Tony?

Tony Harris:

Did you talk to Frank Underwood?

Christian Dawson: I did talk directly with Ted Cruz the staff. And that was interesting because
they are extremely intelligent and they understand these issues so well. The
what - the message that they're putting out there into the world is not the
detailed nuance message that they actually understand. And that was an
eye-opening to me to know that they actually have a very nuanced view of
this.
Tony Harris:

I would love to hear more about that. Do we have time?

Tony Holmes:

We can allow a couple of minutes if you want to say more about that quickly if
you…

Christian Dawson: Sure.
((Crosstalk))
Tony Holmes:

…you can say more.

Christian Dawson: Sure. So when we sat down to talk to them and I expected to have this
conversation that was focused on Obama's giving the Internet away to China
and Russia. And no, it was on US ownership of .mil and .gov which is
something that I believe will be addressed here at ICANN. It was they bylaw
on human rights and how they think that that has the potential to force ICANN

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 16

into a position through lawsuit to start to deal with content, domain level
takedowns of content based on human rights issues. And there was a third.
I'm going to need to refer to my notes but those were the ones we spent most
of our time talking about their concerns around.
Tony Holmes:

Okay so I would suggest if people want to have any more detail around that
you speak to Christian off-line. We do need to move on. And the reason I was
able to allow a few more minutes for that was because I was actually taking
Christian's time.
And the next item is universal acceptance. This is something that's incredibly
important for ISPs. And we need to engage a lot more I think as a group with
the excellent work that's been going on in that group that Tony and Christian
have been involved with. So Christian over to you. I know that there's a
session running directly after this meeting I think on universal acceptance
almost directly after. But if you can bring us up to date with where we are on
that that would be excellent.

Christian Dawson: Absolutely. I also sent a four page document around to the private list so you
can get a more detailed view of exactly what it is we've been working on and
the Universal Accepting Steering Group since Marrakesh. I will say I'm
extremely excited that our Web site went live today. If you go to uasg.tech it
is a collection of resources that we've started to develop for the universal
acceptance community in order to basically marshal our resources and have
people grab the things that they need to go and push them to the right places
for people to make. So this is not to convince a layman what universal
acceptance is. This is for volunteers and volunteer resources. So go to the
uasg.tech and learn about what our latest volunteer resources are that you
can take to your communities to push the goal of universal acceptance.
We in addition to launching that Web site have in the past couple of months
hired a PR firm to help us drive engagement at the CIO and CTO level. The
biggest accomplishment that I think we've had -- and I'm going to read this

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 17

directly from the sheet that I sent you -- is working on clarity of audience.
Since we ultimately need to convince pretty much every coder in the world to
make sure that their systems are up to speed accepting all modern TLDs
that's a heavy left. Trying to figure out narrowly what our focus is and who we
need to hit first has been a chore but one that we've been up to the task of.
So it says as much as we love the ICANN community by and large is not who
the UASG is trying to reach. Universal acceptance as an issue for
applications that leverage the Internet. Our audience is people who could
make this happen, developers and system architects and consultants and
contracting firms, people who can direct this to happen for CIOs, people who
can influence the staff and C-suite, board members, government officials,
ministers, consultants, media industry influencers. That said we're still keen
for the Internet industry registries registrars, ISPs and hosting providers to get
their own systems UA ready.
So the firm that we have contracted with is collaborating with us on
messaging to CIOs and CTOs in Fortune 500 companies and specific
individuals that we have put forward on a target list that we consider low-ish
hanging fruit, basically people in technology companies that we can get to
specifically see the merits of making their systems UA ready. In an effort to
do that we've published our first ten documents. If you go to uasg.tech you
can download our first ten documents which are now in a number of
environment, UASG 001 002 and so on and so forth that detail various
aspects, quick guides quick references and overview documents that will
allow you to find the thing that you need to know about universal acceptance
for the audience that you're trying to reach.
There are two measurement projects underway. I know that (Mark) you're
keenly interested in what it is we're doing to try and to measure the
effectiveness of what it is we are doing. The first is to look at 25 browser and
operating system combinations determine if they're UA ready. And the
second is to look at determined list of hundreds of the largest Web sites to

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 18

see how UA ready they are. Over 90% of our Web sites that have been
tested so far except our ASCII new four character TLDs like they'll take it out
photography. But less than 5% are Unicode at IDN based addresses. We're
going to continue to provide quarterly updates on the things that we are
measuring there to see how much of a change we're seeing in our
established lists so to determine how effective we're being.
In addition to that we've done some events. Tony did one, I did one. I guess
we can briefly talk about what we've done with those. I did a universal
acceptance session at M3AAWG. M3AAWG is the Messaging Malware and
Mobile Anti-abuse Working Group. These are the people that spite - fight
spam and malware. And I brought Ram Moham with me from Affilias who's
also the chair of the Universal Acceptance Steering Group. We had an
excellent engaged session with a lot of the people that I think could actually
go in drive the universal acceptance to carry the flag and move it forward
within their organizations many of which – many of whom are telcos and
ISPs.
Tony Harris:

Just take a minute.

Tony Holmes:

Sure.

Tony Harris:

So I mean I'll be very brief.

Tony Holmes:

Thanks.

Tony Harris:

I did the other event that Christian mentioned Buenos Aires which was with a
network that I covered by - but I didn't discover. Actually they came and
called it my office. And it's amazing. It's a network of 6000 system managers,
people who works in banks and companies. And every online and Internet
and digital systems of all these organizations and companies.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 19

And they had an event and Buenos Aries which we - ICANN sponsored. We
gave out – this is a Spanish version of the Quick Guide for Universal
Acceptance. I think Christian has this been put in English also do you know?
Christian Dawson: Yes it is. So they'll probably be going that out in a meeting here. I'm not sure.
And for me as a non-technical person to be waiting amongst all these tables
loaded with these systems operators they were all doing exercises on
different problems. And then we had some help from somebody from
Microsoft who came over and gave a talk. And the big thing now will be the
follow through with the whole network which will - I was going to bring this up
in the universal acceptance meeting on what I think we should do with groups
like this. They have groups like this all over the world by the way. Anyhow
that was something which was pretty interesting.
Tony Holmes:

Okay thank you. It is as I said a really important issue for us. And I realize
there's a clash with GNSO part two meeting. But I think as a constituency if
we can spare spread ourselves around between those two meetings it would
be particularly helpful. And Christian it sounded as though you've made great
strides. And at this stage I should probably say thanks to both you and Tony
for the work you have done in getting out to the community. But it sounds as
though you've made great strides on the messages you need to get out there.
And you've mentioned you've now got the PR firm engaged as well. But what
about the measurements? The real crunchy part of this is making sure you
get out to the people you need to and being able to measure how successful
you are at getting those messages out there. And I know from the work we've
done before in this constituency it's a really hard thing to do. So how are you
actually going to measure that element of success to see that the work you've
done is actually going to prove fruitful?

Christian Dawson: So the two areas in which we've established measurements before and the
things that I was trying to detail their one is we've got that established list of
big Web sites and determining whether all of them - right now 90% of them

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 20

meet our ASCII basically how we want them to behave for all ASCII TLDs.
But only 5% of them behave in a way that we want them to behave with
regards to IDN non-Latin character scripts. We're going to keep on monitoring
that list of big Web sites basically as one measurement tool. And the other is
specifically we now are going to have a list of groups, actual individuals who
run actual infrastructure in actual companies. And they're going to basically
maintain a list of touch points. And we're going to check in with them to see if
they're converting.
Tony Holmes:

I think we're aware that things break at all levels in this environment if you're
not careful. So do you feel that that's enough? I mean it is hid in the smaller
guys that don't get involved in ICANN that probably have an awareness of
gTLD evolution but they don't necessary have the - this whole process that
will take them down the path of actually checking that their elements are
going to stand up to the test…

Christian Dawson: Yes.
Tony Holmes:

…that these put there. Do you feel that's enough or…

Christian Dawson: I don't think any of the efforts that we're doing are enough. I think that we
have identified the areas in which we can make the best substantive impact
that current efforts allow. And we can significantly improve things by tackling
the areas where we can most quickly solve the biggest problems. But the
overall issue is going to linger for years.
Tony Holmes:

One final thing on this Tony?

Tony Harris:

Well I really enjoyed the question and I would add it's something I'm going to
bring up in the, now in the Universal Acceptance Meeting. I think this has to
be taken a lot broader which was something Tony was hinting at. We should
call this updating the Internet and get attention, world attention. And then we
should have a certification or universal acceptance compliant because if you

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 21

have a certification everybody's going to pay attention and they want to –
they're going to have want to have it. And this should also be extended to
IPv6 which is in the same position.
Basically we have two Internet critical resources IP numbers and domain
names which are not being resolved uniformly across the community and the
users which is insane. I mean everything on the Internet critical resources
should work everywhere for everybody not just sort of, you know, be at
different stages of I'm going to do it, I'm not going to do it. I know about it, I
don't know about it. That's not good news. You've got Internet of Things
coming down inside of everything. Everything's going to go digital. You have
to get that thing in order. This is from a non-technical person speaking.
Christian Dawson: One quick note it's funny you say that because the subject of the presentation
that Ram and I gave in Philadelphia at M3AAWG it was not solely centered
on universal acceptance. We paired it with IPv6 and DNS SEC and we called
it Eating your Broccoli because many people don't want to go ahead and eat
their vegetables but if they don't eat their vegetables they're not going to
grow. And that's basically the analogy that we use. You need to do these
things in order to grow.
Tony Holmes:

Thanks. I do feel pitching the message is so often the case all of this. It's
been interesting the work we've done on GNSO futures. We spent some time
looking at challenges for ICANN within that group and getting some feedback.
And a lot of the feedback seem to come back about outreach. And a number
of people there made the same point in different ways which was that when
we go out to do outreach about ICANN we go out and we tell them how
ICANN works. It's not the way to get people engaged. You need to tell them
how it impacts them and what the issues that they need to think about that
are being addressed through ICANN, completely different way of viewing
things. And I think so some sort of challenges with universal acceptance.
Anymore comments on this before we move on?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 22

Okay and so it's really been an interesting session that follows and would
certainly encourage people to go along to that participating in it – within it. So
we're done now to ARB. I have one item on that particular agenda item. And
that is to make people aware that a late proposal that came up was to hold a
meeting later today at from 3:00 till 4;30. And the challenge is it's a pretty
small room where this meeting's going to take place. But the invite went out
to the SO AC list for the GNSO. And basically the meeting's going to talk
about contractual compliance with a specific focus. And that focus is that
what is in those contracts that we could look to ICANN to enforce that stop a
lot of the bad things happening around the Internet so some of the issues
around fraud and misrepresentation? How far does the contractual
compliance obligations from registrars actually go? So the meeting is
between the registrars and a couple of – a few representatives from the other
constituencies so sites where it was suggested that we – each constituency
could take up to three people along to that particular meeting. So I'd like to
throw that open. It's something we need to engage in and ask who would be
interested in coming along to that? (Christian), okay that would be good. Any
other involvement that would help take that along from an ISP? (Mark)?
Okay so what we'll do we'll go along to that meeting. And I mentioned we
have this session now ISP session on Wednesday and we will report back
during that meeting as to what happened this afternoon from that session. So
we're almost at the end of the time that we have allotted for this meeting. I
have one other issue to raise though and that is a question that's common on
the list. And it's come in from (Shanader Hussein) who says so he has a
simple question to ask us all. And that is how ISPCP members can benefit
from ICANN's multi-stakeholder structure?
So I have an answer from that but I'd like others also to think about that and
to offer some feedback whilst we're live on that particular issue. Does anyone
want to help answer that? So the question is how ISP members can benefit
from the ICANN multi-stakeholder structure?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 23

So I think part of the answer there is that so much what happens within
ICANN has a direct impact back on ISP CPEs but they aren't ISP CP issues
alone. So if we don't have the ability to have fled dialogue at the multistakeholder level with all the other partners involved no matter how it impacts
and more to what you (unintelligible) then I think we lose something
fundamentally important that gets the right answer for us as ISPs in our
industry. And this environment actually facilitates that. You can do it through
that multi-stakeholder participation. Does anybody else want to help give an
answer back to get around that? (Jahanga) you're on that.
So (Jahanga) you're welcome to follow-up with that. He says thank you for
your comments in the chat. But if there's any more thinking around that I'm
sure we would be all quite willing to have that conversation with (Jahanga)
during one of our meetings. So thank you for the question. So with that I'll
adjourn this meeting. There's other things following up quickly. Alain?
Alain Bidron:

Just (unintelligible) to Russia. You mentioned the agenda that is quite
challenging with the universal exit plans most route in parallel with the GNSO
one. So there's also a session coming in the same slot with the annual ASO
open session. And it is also open to (unintelligible) for the ISP communities.
So your frustration to have to show between universal acceptance ISO
narrow open meeting and GNSO where we are located.

Tony Holmes:

That's a very valid point. And I think when we get to end of the next few days
there is some sessions on the feedback as to how this meeting were. But
there's been a lot of challenges around the schedule. And that was always
going to occur. But we need to make that point during those feedback
sessions that we absolutely struggle with some of the issues being run in
parallel and to give examples of that. So we should certainly follow-up and do
that. Wolf-Ulrich I thought you wanted the floor. Okay. Please Olivier?

Olivier Muron:

Thank you. I just wanted to make one announcement in this round and inform
you about that I am also a representative in the Registry Stakeholder Group

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16.8:00 pm CT
Confirmation # 8995681
Page 24

for the registry of .Hamburg. And first I wanted to make this transparent and
on the other hand according to the bylaws I can only exercise my vote in one
of the constituencies. So for the future I will exercise my voting rights in the
Registry Stakeholder Group and I will put my vote in this group to my
colleague (Lars Hoffman) who is also very active in the universal acceptance
working group.
So just for the records I think it's important to have this in the minutes and to
inform you. Part of that I don't see any conflict of interest but just wanted to
make this transparent and inform you about that - the voting rights will be to
Lars. Thank you.
Tony Holmes:

Okay thank you for that and certainly that will be noted. I was just informed
that we had two minutes to vacate the room and another meeting follows. I
think we have no time at all now. So on that basis thank you everyone for
participation and look forward to talking more with you across the next few
days. Thank you.

END

