ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 1

Transcription ICANN Helsinki
GNSO Meeting Board
Monday, 27 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at
The recordings and transcriptions of the calls are posted on the GNSO Master Calendar
page http://gnso.icann.org/en/group-activities/calendar

James Bladel:

Anything? There we go. Hey. Thank you. Man, this is a lot of people in a
small room; thank you.
Chris Disspain has arrived. Yes. Thank you. If we could have councilors and
our guests from the Board, if they could make their way to the table, if
everyone else could please top up your coffee or other refreshments and
make your way to your seat.
And again, if we could ensure that the table space is conserved for councilors
and visitors, that would be fantastic -- thank you -- as we're slowly starting to
accumulate.
I see Bruce. This is the Australian section over here, and then - Heather,
you're on the wrong side. So thank you.
And then I think we had GÃ¶ran in the room as well.

Woman:

He's coming.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 2

James Bladel:

He's coming? Okay, great. We've got a spot for him here.

Bruce Tonkin:

I think at this point, John, you're in the wrong spot. You're the odd man.

James Bladel:

I'm in the wrong spot? I'm - you know what, Bruce? I'm always in the wrong
spot; I made a career out of it. So, okay.
But I think - thank you everyone. I know it's a very - it's kind of a small room
and kind of a big group, so if we can - there you are -- the man of the hour.
How are you?
So we'll let everyone get seated while the staff begins the recording, and I'll
wait to get the thumbs up from them. That's when we know we've begun for
real.
Okay, thank you. Welcome. This is the next session of the GNSO Council.
You have various members of the ICANN Board of Directors.
I think we should probably go around the table here for introductions just
because I think we have enough visitors and we've had some change out
here, so at least we can get the names. But if we can go through that fairly
quickly, we can get to our topics.
So let's start down at this far end here. I can see someone sitting behind
David but I can't see who it is. Oh, there; it's Stefania. Let's start with
Stefania.

Stefania Milan:

Stefania Milan; Non-Commercial Stakeholder.

David Cake:

David Cake; Non-Commercial Stakeholder Group from Electronic Frontiers
Australia.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 3

Volker Greimann: Volker Greimann; Key-Systems GNSO Councilor for the Registrars.
Jennifer Gore:

Jennifer Gore with Web.com; GNCO Council for the Registrars.

Jonne Soininen:

Jonne Soininen; IETF Liaison unto the ICANN Board.

Chris Disspain:

Chris Disspain; ICANN Board.

Avri Doria:

Avri Doria; NCSG Alternate from the Council.

Marilia Maciel:

Marilia Maciel; NCSG Representative to the Council.

Julf Helsingius:

Julf Helsingius; NomCom Appointee to GNSO Council.

Carlos Raul Gutierrez:

Carlos Gutierrez; NomCom houseless member of the Council.

Stephanie Perrin: Stephanie Perrin; NSCG Council Member.
(Hector Alicano): (Hector Alicano); ISPCP Constituency.
Tony Harris:

Tony Harris; I'm ISPCP. I'm a Councilor in the GNSO Council and also a
member of the Executive Committee on the ISPCP. And I'm also Registry.

Keith Drazek:

Keith Drazek; Registry Stakeholder Group.

Philip Corwin:

Philip Corwin; Councilor for the Business Constituency and the Commercial
Stakeholder Group.

Heather Forrest: Heather Forrest; Intellectual Property Constituency and Vice-Chair of the
GNSO Council on behalf of the Non-Contracted Parties House.
(Marvin Cel):

Yes, (Marvin Cel); ICANN Support (unintelligible).

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 4

James Bladel:

I'm James Bladel and I'm a councilor from Registrars - North America.

Steve Crocker:

Steve Crocker; ICANN Board.

Bruce Tonkin:

Bruce Tonkin: ICANN Board.

Donna Austin:

Donna Austin for the Registry Stakeholder Group.

George Sadowsky:

George Sadowsky; ICANN Board.

Rinalia Abdul Rahim: Rinalia Abdul Rahim; ICANN Board.
Lito Ibarra:

Lito Ibarra; ICANN Board.

Mason Cole:

Mason Cole; GNSO Liaison to the GAC.

Cherine Chalaby: Cherine Chalaby; ICANN Board.
Rubens Kuhl:

Rubens Kuhl; Registry Stakeholder Group.

Greg Shatan:

Greg Shatan; IPC President.

Paul McGrady:

Paul McGrady; IPC GNSO Councilor.

Susan Kawaguchi:

Susan Kawaguchi; Business Constituency Councilor.

Markus Kummer: Markus Kummer; ICANN Board.
Man:

(Unintelligible); Board Member Elect.

Ram Mohan:

Ram Mohan; SSAC Liaison to the ICANN Board.

Brian Scarpelli:

Brian Scarpelli; Private Stakeholder.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 5

James Bladel:

Okay, David.

David Tait:

David Tait; ICANN Staff.

James Bladel:

Perfect, thank you. Thanks everyone and welcome to our Guests from the
ICANN Board, and of course (unintelligible) which is also ICANN Board -- and
Steve.
We had a couple of topics that we had circulated in advance for discussion,
but of course -- given that this is a sort of a lighter approach to the way we've
conducted meetings in the past -- we are open to new topics as well; we're
not going to stand on ceremony here. We do have a couple of folks who have
volunteered from the Council to raise our topics.
But first, I just wanted to open the floor to Goren or Steve -- if you had any
opening remarks -- otherwise we can dive right in to the topics. It's really your
discretion at this point.

Goren Marby:

Steve.

Steve Crocker:

Goren and I are still trying to work out our signals here.
As I - I don't know how many were around first thing this morning, but as I
remarked, our posture this week -- the Board's posture -- is that we're here to
be helpful. And I think we're all trying to understand how best to use the time
and the new format.
Want to recognize that the man to my right -- Bruce Tonkin who is as much
one of you as he is one of us -- is rotating off of the Board -- not for a few
months. But it feels like it's imminent and we're already beginning to miss
him.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 6

Let me put you in the featured seat here and take control and say what kind
of things we should be talking about now and anything you want to say about
what kind of things we should be talking about in the future. And then you get
to escape cleanly at the next meeting.
Bruce Tonkin:

Well, I think, you know, fundamentally, we're here to listen than to draw the
agenda of this session.
But one thing, I think, that would be helpful in terms of how we work as an
organization is getting a sense of priorities and where results should be
focused on because I have a sense that we're doing too much and none of
them particularly well.
So I think, you know, it would be interesting to hear from the GNSO is what is
your top three priorities. You know, where do you want the organization to
support in your policy work? You know, that would be helpful.

James Bladel:

Thanks gentlemen. We did have a couple of topics -- at least we could call
them conversation starters -- and that we could table those discussions and
then see where the conversation leads.
The first one would be - our spokesperson will be Heather Forrest who is a
Councilor for the IPC and also a Vice-Chair. Heather?

Heather Forrest: Thanks, James, very much; Heather Forrest. And to respond to Bruce, I don't
know if this is one of our top three priorities as much as it is one of our top
three bushfires at the moment that we're having to put out.
And indeed it seems that there's an impression that the GNSO or the GNSO
Council needs to do something about this one, and we feel as if we're waiting
for instruction from the Board. So our response to the community at this stage
is we need some guidance before we can do anything.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 7

The topic is the matter of the protection of the names and acronyms
belonging to the Red Cross -- the International Red Cross. This is an issue
that returned to our plate after perhaps even as much as a two-year hiatus.
At the Marrakech meeting, James and Donna and I were approached by
representatives of the International Red Cross, and James and I met with
those folks on the side in Marrakech. And they expressed to us some
significant concerns and hopes that we would ameliorate those concerns and
do so in a very rapid fashion.
And we said we weren't really in a position to do so given that we had
completed a PDP - or not we, but our predecessors on the GNSO Council
had completed a PDP some time ago and those recommendations were still
standing. Those recommendations diverged significantly from advice
received from the GAC, and that the matter really had been referred to the
Board.
We sent a letter -- most recently on the 31st of May to the Board -summarizing this situation and essentially asking for guidance as to what we
should do next.
And it would be very helpful to us. It's, of course, a very substantive matter.
We've taken some time as a council since Marrakech to get ourselves across
the issue more fully. Many of us -- most of us I think -- were not on the
Council on the time that this was first being discussed. And so we've had a
fair bit of work to do ourselves to get across these issues, and we're in a
better position now to talk about these things certainly than we were in
Marrakech.
Given that it is such a substantive topic, we, perhaps, don't anticipate that
you have all of the answers for us at this stage. But any sort of guidance as to
where you are in your thinking -- and how soon we might expect some input - would be very helpful.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 8

Steve Crocker:

Thank you. Let me ask Chris to speak to this. I have a couple thoughts of my
own, but I suspect that Chris is much further on this than I am.

Chris Disspain:

Thank you Steve and thank you Heather. Okay, let me see if we can sort of
like level set, so they're split into two issues really.
In respect to the Red Cross, that came to us with GAC Advice saying, "This is
a unique organization." I think it was combined with the Olympics at the time,
but this is a unique organization and they need to be treated in a particular
way.
So what we did was we agreed to reserve -- I'll use the term reserve. I know
that some people say it's not reserving, but we reserved the Red Cross
names. The acronyms we put into the same bucket as the IGO acronyms
because we were concerned about acronyms as a principle, so I'm going to
come back to those.
Subsequently, the Red Cross came back and said, "Actually, what we would
like to reserve is all of the society names for the countries." So I guess it's
Australian Society Red Cross or something -- whatever those names are.
And I think it's that plus the acronyms which I'll treat separately but we're
actually talking about.
And that, I think, has slightly dropped through the cracks; that particularly one
has slightly dropped through the cracks. I don't think the Board -- to my
recollection -- had much of a discussion about it.
I think from memory -- but you'd be better to guide me on this -- that the
request to reserve those names is - there is GNSO policy that those names
should be treated differently to that and those should get protection for 90
days like the Trademark Clearinghouse. Is that right? Okay.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 9

And I don't - the Board has not put its mind to figuring out what to do about
that, but will. So that's that piece, and apologies for that.
The second piece is the acronyms -- which goes into the IGOs as well as the
Red Cross, right. And with the IGOs, their names are reserved; it's the
acronyms that are temporarily reserved.
There is - you have a policy recommendation in respect to the notification
piece. So I've got an IGO; I've got an acronym. I want to be notified if
somebody registers that acronym. You've done some policy work on that.
The GAC Advice - well, the GAC Advice is to reserve them. We told the GAC
we won't do that, but we haven't formally triggered the refusal to follow GAC
Advice process; we're trying to not do that if we can avoid it.
You have understood that you might need to look at changing slightly the
recommendations you've already made. If we can reach a compromise with
the GAC and the IGOs as to how to deal with registration of those acronyms - even the equivalent of the Trademark Clearinghouse -- it wouldn't actually
be the Trademark Clearinghouse because they're not trademarks.
And if we can come to a sort of consensus on that with the IGOs, then we
would be coming back to you formally and asking you to trigger your process
that you have to reconsider a policy.
Or, if you prefer, we could reject your policy recommendation; it would be a
matter for us to talk about. I understand for some of you, you might prefer us
to reject it rather than ask you to use the process of reconsidering, but that's
something we can talk about.
And then the next piece down -- and I'm nearly finished now -- is that there is
the remedies that the IGOs want, so rapid takedown and dispute resolution.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 10

And there is a GNSO working group -- which I think Phil Corwin is -- yes,
doing that. And we are currently talking to the IGOs.
Now I would very much like to lift this out of having separate discussions and
see if we can't just get everybody together and knock it out.
But bluntly, feedback from the past has been that once the IGO
representatives and the GNSO representatives come together, that's not
necessarily the most constructive and collegial environment in which to get
these things down. And that's kind of we sort of stepped in in the first place.
We are close, I think, to having a proposal with the IGOs that it is likely to be
acceptable to the GAC and to the IGOs, and then we need to come to you
and see if it's acceptable to you.
Steve Crocker:

Let me - thank you very much for that Chris. Let me offer up that I want to
engage in a little bit of collegially with Chris that may expose a few gaps in
various views about how things work -- some within the Board and some
between us, and you and the GAC and others.
The Board is not the place where substantive decisions should be made
about a policy. The Board is a place where we really oversee and monitor the
process that's been followed, and that the results that are offered up for us to
approve meet a -- and I don't want to be too specific about it -- but basically
are consistent and sensible and will work.
And so, we - and this is a case and there are plenty of other cases where
different parts of the community have different views about what should
happen. And we get into this kind of endless cycle of we wish that everybody
would get together and come up with an answer.
We get presented with what you make a decision, and I have to confess that
we exasperate the situation some because we accept the language of "the

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 11

Board will make a decision." Or this gets handed up the Board or - and
people talk about it in those terms.
And it really is not what anybody should want that the Board is sitting as a
kind of court of determination of the substance of matters. We have plenty of
expertise; we could do that. Sometimes in the past, I think we've fallen into
that. But that's not the role that the Board should have; that's not the role that
you want the Board to have.
So the maximum that I would say that the Board is going to get involved in is
on the order of the kinds of things that Chris talked about where we will try to
facilitate bringing the parties together as opposed to stepping in and saying,
"Well, we've listened to both sides and we've decided that it's like this or it's
like that." Because if we fall into that mode, then the question is how do you
appeal, where is the escalation if you don't like the decisions we've made
because we're just -- at best -- no better than everybody else at making these
decisions.
We might be pretty good, but we're not perfect. And that's not the mechanism
that you want for the Board. So that's - I said it collegially and I haven't taken
a breath yet.
Do you want to respond to that Chris?
Chris Disspain:

James, is that okay?

James Bladel:

Yes.

Chris Disspain:

Steve, I agree with everything you said. The only recall, if you will, is that in
this case, we actually have - it is our decision -- in innocence. We have GAC
Advice that says to do one thing; we have GNSO Advice that says recommendation that says to do another.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 12

So in parts of it, we are actually at that stage where we could -- if we chose to
-- say, "Thank you very much, thank you very much. Bang, this is what we're
doing." We have not done that. We've said, "Let's see if we can bring the
parties together."
But ultimately, if there isn't an agreement, we will have to make a decision
because it's mandated in the bylaws, right, that we have to do that.
So that's the only thing I would add to you. As a general principle, I agree
100%.
Steve Crocker:

I would - just before. Yes, and in the event that that happens, we need to
have a very clear documentation that you guys made us that -- that we were
forced into it -- so that there's no complaint afterwards about us taking control
of it or being preempting the process.

James Bladel:

Thanks. Okay, I have a queue forming now. Heather, Donna and Phil. So
Heather, you're up.

Heather Forrest: Thanks. Thanks very much James; Heather Forrest. I thank you, Steve, for
your intervention then and Chris as well.
I was a bit disappointed to hear what you said that the feedback that you had
received was that the working relationship between IGOs and the GNSO
wasn't all that positive.
I think one of the things maybe that could help that situation -- I'll say -- we've
had the impression in being approached by the folks involved in this issue
that maybe there's a misconception as to what we're able to do; we as GNSO
leadership and what we as this Council can do. This Council being not the
council that decided on this issue some time ago.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 13

And it would be very helpful if the Board could help us to communicate that
while the GNSO understands that this issue is within the GNSO's remit -given its inherent relationship to generic top-level name policy -- under the
bylaws, there are processes that we have to follow, and those processes
have been followed in this instance.
The Board has intervened -- as you've said. But the specifics in terms of what
the council -- this council -- needs to do following that intervention are not
really clear. And some clarity would help us very much.
So on the first point being help us communicate that we're not being difficult,
we're not being obstructionists, and help us to understand what it is that we
need to do. Thank you.
James Bladel:

Thanks Heather; excellent points. Donna, you're up next.

Donna Austin:

Thanks James; Donna Austin. Fully agree with Heather. We had a little bit of
a discussion, you know, prep discussion before the Board comes in here.
And I think one of the observations from my perspective is we don't
necessarily - one of the frustrations with this if we're to use down the road, we
don't have a resolution. The Red Cross has come to us, and to some extent
tried to lobby us to get some action; we couldn't do that.
We know that the GAC is also frustrated that this hasn't kind of moved on
because the Red Cross is coming in to lobby them as well.
So I think sometimes we get hamstrung because of the processes that we
have, and we try to find a workaround that will give us a result. But that
workaround at the moment isn't happening.
Now we understand that, Chris, you've had discussions with the IGOs, but we
haven't had any visibility into that, so that's part of our frustration as well.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 14

So maybe if we can find a way - let's not talk about the substance, but let's
understand what the process is for us to get to an end result and that might
clear some of the way forward. Thanks.
James Bladel:

So we'll go Phil and then Chris. Phil?

Phil Corwin:

Thank you; Phil Corwin. And I just wanted to since Chris mentioned me.
In the working group, I co-Chair along with Petter Rindforth -- former
councilor from the IPC. I just wanted to get a bit into that and to relationship
to what the Board is considering.
Our working group is the working group on curative rights processes for
IGOs. We have two basic questions before us -- to make it simple. One is do
IGOs -- even if they have not trademarked their names or acronyms -- have
standing to bring either UDRP or URS action?
And while we haven't made our final recommendations, we've pretty much
resolved that issue that in almost every conceivable case they would have
standing.
The other issue is whether under the accepted views of the scope of
sovereign immunity of IGOs, whether the mutual jurisdiction clause in the
UDRP and URS would offend that. And that would occur only in the very rare
instance that an IGO brought an action under either the UDRP or URS won
the action, and the registrant of the domain having lost - exercised their right
to bring an appeal in a court -- a mutual jurisdiction -- which of course the
court is in a nation determined by the UDRP rules -- and whether that would
offend.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 15

And we've approached this with the view that -- being very careful -- with the
view that ICANN must recognize and be respectful of existing legal rights but
have no remit to create rights that don't exist.
And our working group made very rapid progress through June of last year up
to the Buenos Aires meeting last year, and then kind of hit a stop because
none of the members of the working group had any expertise in this very
esoteric area of sovereign immunity and the subset of sovereign immunity -not for nation states but for international and inter-governmental
organizations.
And we sought ICANN's modest financial assistance to hire a recognized
legal expert, and late last year found one -- Professor Edward Swaine at the
George Washington University Law School.
And we've just received a final - about a 30 page legal memo from him on
this issue, and we'll be discussing that at our working group meeting
tomorrow -- which is one thirty to three.
And if you'll read the legal memo, you'll find -- not surprisingly -- that the
question of what is the scope of IGO immunity, that the answer is it depends.
And there's multiple different ways that different national courts would
analyze this, and some might find sovereign immunity to this while others
would not, and it's complicated is the answer.
But at least we have a very solid legal opinion which is not, you know, people
can look at it and disagree.
The other thing I wanted to say is throughout the existence of our working
group, we have proactively reached out to both the GAC and the IGO small
group and urged them to participate in our group because we wanted their
input. And I have to say, quite frankly, we've been greatly disappointed in that
regard.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 16

We did have a meeting with the Chair and co-Chair of the GAC; that we being
Petter and I had a meeting with them in Buenos Aires last June -- an early
morning meeting -- which I remember quite well because there was no coffee
in the room which made the meeting a challenge at 8:00am.
But we've really - I don't want to say that the IGOs have boycotted our
meeting, but they've been conspicuous in their absence raising some
concerns that they thought they could achieve something with the Board that
- I don't want to mention names but I've been told to my face that they
thought we were prejudiced against their position where, in fact, we've tried to
be completely objective and very careful about how we've proceeded.
But there's still time for both the GAC and the IGO to engage to comment on
this legal memo and to participate in the final stage of our working group.
We'll be making the final decisions on our findings and our recommendations.
But we do expect to bring this working group to a close before the end of
2016 now that we have the legal opinion. And so we're in the latter stages
now. And we have been, you know, we've been aware of the Board activities,
but we're hoping for more definite information on where they stood.
So I hope that - I'd be happy to answer any questions, but I just wanted to
bring people up to speed to understand exactly what our working group is
doing which there's some overlap of what the Board is considering; they're
related. But they're also quite different.
And I'd be happy to answer any questions, and we have our 90-minute
session tomorrow -- which if you're interested in this issue we hope you'll
attend and participate. Thank you.
James Bladel:

Thanks. So what time is that session tomorrow?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 17

Phil Corwin:

It's 1:30 to 3:00 pm.

James Bladel:

Okay, Chris and then Bruce. Chris?

Chris Disspain:

Thanks James. Phil, just to acknowledge what you said, yes; you have in fact
been extremely willing to step forward and ask for, you know, input. So I
completely acknowledge that.
May I suggest that what might be a good idea is if whoever the right person is
-- whether it's you or someone -- actually writes to the Chair of the GAC
enclosing the legal advice letter, and requesting the GAC to look at it and
consider it. You might not want to do that but it's just a thought.

Phil Corwin:

I'll defer to Mary Wong, but I believe we've already conveyed that letter to the
GAC and the IGO -- a small group -- and asked for their input. And we sent
them the preliminary draft, and of course now we have the final draft received
about a week ago.

Chris Disspain:

Thanks. And I just wanted to respond to Donna on two things.
One, Donna, yes; visibility. There has been some visibility. We did have a
couple of meetings where members of the GNSO and the IGOs were
together with me and Jaime, Heather and a few others and a couple of Board
members, and the Chair of the GAC. So there have been a couple of those.
But I think we should, you know, it's time to bring everybody around to the
table.
And the second thing I wanted to say is really just by the way of an apology, I
think we really do need to peel off the Red Cross country names and just get
that off of the table. It's nothing to do with - it's not the same argument as the
acronym is, so I think we just need to get that out as quickly as we can.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 18

So let's agree that the Board will do that and deal with that, and that will then
mean that we're only dealing with the acronyms and that's a discreet piece
that we can deal with separately.
James Bladel:

Thanks Chris. So Bruce and then Donna.

Bruce Tonkin:

Yes, thanks James. I think it's asking the question, you know, what can the
GNSO do?
One of the things I think is really helpful perhaps is to -- maybe in a really
simple diagram on one page -- explain the processes that have been
developed around trademarks as a starting point.
And the processes that are being developed there is that there is trademark
law. We've come up with a lightweight dispute mechanism -- which is the
UDRP which is experts in that area of trademark law; make a decision
between two parties.
Then there's a very defined appeal process where if either of the parties
disagrees with that decision, then they can then take it to a court of law. That
has been a system that's been in place for many years and has been quite
effective.
In recent years, we've made an enhancement to that which is the Trademark
Clearinghouse. And principally, what that does is it's giving notice to the
trademark holder. So now we have notice to the trademark holder, we have a
dispute process that they can use, and now we have an additional dispute
process -- which is the Rapid Suspension Process but there's three dispute
processes available -- and then there's a court of law behind it. So it's a very
clear, simple framework actually.
And then the question is if we start looking at some of these new things is to
follow exactly the same path. So the first path is what's the law that defines

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 19

the matter, and I think in Red Cross there is quite well defined laws available
so you can start with that point.
But then the question is, is there some sort of dispute process that could be
put in place to deal with the dispute where that law impacts the particular
registration? And then the appeal process should be pretty well defined as
well -- which presumably it could then go to a court of law if either party is
unhappy with that dispute process.
I think we should try and map both cases out in exactly the same way, so
that's at least an education piece that's clear and it's a very clear framework
that can apply to any use of law at ICANN because really, we don't make
laws. We basically abide by the national laws that exist.
And then secondly, I think the frustration I'm hearing is it sounds like that
some of the parties that want protection aren't actually engaging with the
policy body that makes that decision. And, you know, I guess to the extent
that we can perhaps encourage -- either through the GAC chair or, you know,
in any meetings that we have with the IGOs -- to encourage and to actually
engage in your policy development process.
So I don't think it's the Board's role to come up with a policy solution. What
we can do is (unintelligible) frame the discussion. I'm sure we would be
happy to - if people were worried that they may be treated unfairly or in a
biased way, then, you know, we're more than happy to help appoint a neutral
facilitator to the extent that it's necessary.
But the key thing is the effected parties need to talk to the groups that are
trying to come up with a solution.
James Bladel:

Thanks Bruce. And we're going to go to Donna for the last word on this.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 20

But before we move to Donna, just want to note that although it's not exactly
what you're looking for, we've been also attempting to produce some
materials that put all of these issues into a one page. And what you see in the
- I think this is actually a two-page document although I don't see Mary. I
think it's a two-page document.
But what you see in the Adobe Room is a side-by-side comparison of the
different - where we landed between GAC Advice, the GNSO
recommendations, the temporary protections and then the permanent
protections that are being sought -- or the delta.
So we can certainly share this with you if you feel that that would be a helpful
resource. It's not exactly what you were asking for, but I think it is a handy
reference guide.
So we'll go with Donna and then Cherine, and then we'll move on because
we have one more topic we want to cover.
Donna Austin:

Thanks James; Donna Austin. Just to respond to something that Chris
suggested that we should couple the Red Cross from the rest of this issue.
So we had some discussion around this one when we were doing the drafting
of the letter. And we do recognize that the Red Cross is a different situation,
but we are concerned that if we couple the IGO acronyms for this as well,
then we'll just have longer delays in resolving the IGO acronym issue.
And I just want to explain that some of the challenge that registry operators
currently have with the temporary reservations of IGOs is that there's no
mechanism to release them.
So with, you know, in the Registry agreement, they are reserved. You cannot,
you know, if you - there is actually a situation where the International Olympic
Committee wanted to use IOC in a number of top-level domains.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 21

An RSEP was submitted to ICANN to see if that could be done and it - itâs just
kind of in a holding pattern because nobody knows what to do with it. So
would - there actually isnât a mechanism at the moment available for Registry
operators even if they have agreement of the IGO in question to actually
release that and have the - have it available for their use.
So thatâs - some of the concern from a Registry operator perspective is that if
we decouple we are concerned that that delays it even further. And also
weâre, you know, we had that added problem that we donât have a
mechanism to release the IGO acronyms at the moment. Thanks.
James Bladel:

Thanks Donna. Cherine has the last word.

Cherine Chalaby: Just an observation from the discussion is that Iâm not clear how the gap
between the GAC advice and the GNSO policy because there are
inconsistency there.
Iâm not clear on the actual step of actually either reconciling those or not and
what is the timeframe for that, because this has been going on for such a
long time and it can go on for another long time.
So itâs not clear to me how this reconciliation is going to happen or not at all,
and face the fact that itâs not going to happen and then weâll have - someone
has to arbitrate in the middle of that.
So Iâm not leaving this meeting with a clear direction frankly on exactly the
time scales of when weâre going to do this and how - what is the process with
a bigger chance of success?
James Bladel:

Thanks Cherine. I think thatâs something weâre struggling with as well. I think
right now what the Council is saying -- and Iâm just going to try and

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 22

paraphrase this -- that weâre not clear and weâre looking for guidance from the
Board on whether or not we should pursue efforts to close that gap.
But I think that where we are for some of us is that weâd like to see some
formal indication from the Board that that gap exists. And I think some of, you
know, I think just speaking personally I think a formal rejection of the
recommendations that donât meet the GAC advice is probably going to go a
long way to upholding the integrity of the PDP process.
Iâm more concerned that if we take some sort of an informal approach where
we start amending the PDP based on, you know, a request or lobbying efforts
or whatever you want to call it that I think that thatâs probably the road we
donât want to go down.
We want to see something that actually follows the script as itâs outlined in
the bylaws.
Bruce Tonkin:

Just to be clearâ¦

James Bladel:

Yes.

Chris Disspain:

â¦there is - so a couple of things. So yes fine, we could do one of several
things. We could reject the GAC advice. We could reject your thing. The your - there are two points.
First of all your current recommendations that we could formally reject only go
to a part of the problem, right, so thatâs not the whole problem. And secondly,
there is actually - itâs not the - sorry, the process to ask you to look at your
policy is a formal process.
Theyâre both formal processes; at least my understanding is theyâre both
formal processes. They both exist so we could reject or we can trigger or ask
you - trigger the process of asking you to reconsider.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 23

Either of those things are available and Iâm happy to do whichever one you
prefer but if we - but all - what we would - if you want to bring this to a head
the quickest way of bringing it to a head is for the Board to take an action
which - whatever that action may be.
What we have - up until now weâve been trying to, you know, bring the parties
together.
James Bladel:

Chris are you asking us what we want?

Chris Disspain:

Well Iâm not. Iâm suggesting you - I will think about that. I donât - I think that
part of the issue with this is incredibly complicated because weâve got several
different pieces.
So if we take the Red Cross out for a second and just talk about the IGOs, we
have a GAC advice on the table that says, âReserve them.â Thatâs the advice.
We have not formally rejected that yet.
We told them we wonât accept it but we have not formally rejected it. Weâve
got your policy that says, âPut them in the thing for 90 days and then thatâs it.â
And then weâve got the ongoing policymaking on the curative rights, so those
are three things going on right now.

James Bladel:

Yes and I think that the - if we can possibly take the curative rights thing and
set that aside because itâs not - itâs peripheral but itâs not on the collision
course with the other two points.
I think what weâre saying is we are open to pursuing those other processes
and initiating them. We donât want that to become the default response to
these questions.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 24

However we also donât want to pursue that blindly. I think we need some
guidance from the Board on which direction, you know, where they fall short
versus GAC advice.
((Crosstalk))
James Bladel:

Are there elements of GAC advice that you think are more important than
others? Whatâs the priority? I mean, otherwise youâre just telling us, you
know, âMake your recommendations look like this.â I guess weâre not clear
whereâ¦

Chris Disspain:

Completely agree. So is this - are we - is it okay to carry this on? I mean, itâs
up to you guys. Iâm happy to do it.

James Bladel:

Yes I think weâve got a couple more minutes.

Chris Disspain:

Okay.

James Bladel:

But we do need toâ¦

Chris Disspain:

Soâ¦

James Bladel:

I know a lot of people are jumping to get in the queue now soâ¦

((Crosstalk))
Chris Disspain:

Two things arise. So first of all you could carve off the curative rights aspects
of this. The challenge there is that itâs the coming to an agreement on the
curative rights that gets them to step away from the, âWe need reservation.â
So the starting point is we want these reserved. Weâve said not formally but
effectively no. They then said, âWhat?â We said basically, âWhatâs your fear?â

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 25

And their fear is that if somebody registers them they have no way of dealing
with it. Now whether you think theyâre right or not doesnât much matter. Thatâs
what they think.
So the first question is they want to be notified that theyâve - someoneâs
registered the acronym. Then the second piece they want is that they want
the Registrant to get a notification.
Weâre pushing back on that and saying, âThatâs not appropriate.â And then
the next thing they want is they want a rapid takedown of some description,
and then they want a DRP of some description.
Itâs the curative rights - the - theyâre saying to them, âWeâll find a way of giving
you the curative rights.â That gets them to step away from the demand that
the names - that the acronyms are reserved.
Thatâs - so it - so they are connected in the sense of trying to bring this to a
head. The only formal thing we can do is either reject their advice in which
case we then go into a - what effectively is a six month formal process - we
think normally about six months of rejecting the advice, which is effectively
going to mean acting in good faith and carry on negotiating, right. Or we can
formally - I guess itâs reject your policy recommendation.
Bruce Tonkin:

But essentially Chris itâs not an or, itâs an and/or.

Chris Disspain:

Sorry. And we could reject both.

Bruce Tonkin:

Thatâs an and/or.

Chris Disspain:

We could reject both.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 26

Bruce Tonkin:

You can reject both but letâs take it offline because I think we - what will come
back to you I guess is a bit of a decision tree so you actually understand what
the decision options are.
But yes in simple terms we have two groups at ICANN that have a conflicting
position. The Boardâs option is to accept neither of them/accept one of them.
It doesnât look like we can accept both of them because they conflict. But in
either case I think what weâre then trying to do is to say if we reject either one
of the positions is then saying, âWhatâs the next step?â
And as Chris says, you know, for example if we accepted your middle
Column 2 here which is the notice piece that doesnât necessarily solve the
problem if thereâs no process for what happens after you get that notice.
You know, so I found out about it but now I donât know what to do. So that to
me would seem that thereâs a missing piece but letâs map out the decision
tree for you and weâll come back.
But I do agree that what Iâm hearing is you want the Board to make some
decisions one way or another so that youâve got clarity. But I think the
direction that Chris is heading - ultimately what weâre trying to find is a
consensus position that meets the requirements of the law in this topic area
between the two areas/two groups if you like.

James Bladel:

Okay thank you Bruce. Thank you Chris. Thank you Cherine and Donna and
Heather and everyone who weighed in on that and Phil as well. I think weâre
going to pivot to our next topic.
That was the easy one by the way just so youâre properly prepared. Oh our
next topic - and Iâll turn it over to Susan Kawaguchi whoâs volunteered to take
the lead on this.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 27

But we want to tee up a discussion regarding our recommendations of
Privacy/Proxy Accreditation Services. Susan?
Susan Kawaguchi:

So thank you for that discussion. I actually found that very enlightening

and fascinating and have lots more questions but offline. All right. So as you
all know we - there was a PDP for the Privacy/Proxy issues and the working
group did a great job in my opinion.
I happened to be on it but there was a lot of people that spent a lot of time
developing positions and recommendations, and we provided the final report
to the community and to the Board with those recommendations.
The GAC did not find these recommendations acceptable, so what weâre
asking of the Board is whatâs your viewpoint on this and how do we move
forward?
James Bladel:

Do we have any takers from the Board? Anyone wish to speak to this?
Everyone went shy all of a sudden.

Chris Disspain:

Donât look at me. I can say someâ¦

James Bladel:

Chris we would neverâ¦

Chris Disspain:

Oh no, no. Of courseâ¦

((Crosstalk))
James Bladel:

â¦get in the way between you and the microphone.

Chris Disspain:

Thank you James.

James Bladel:

Yes.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 28

Chris Disspain:

Thank you so much. My own level of self-awareness has now been enhanced
by your feedback. Thank you. My personal view -- this is my personal view -is that the GAC were involved as they should be in your policy development
process.
Thatâs pursuant to the bylaws. I understand that there were representatives
for want of a better way of putting it who were supposed to be there. I think
they - I suspect that they werenât there anything like as much as they
shouldâve been or couldâve been, and that once again we find ourselves in a
situation where - after the event of reaching a recommendation and all of the
effort thatâs gone into something that I know is contentious within the GNSO
because of the contention between the Contracted Party side and Intellectual
Property side, we find ourselves now once again having what is in effect law
enforcement I suspect wandering into the room and saying, âThis is not
enough.â
And I think my - again my personal view is that thatâs - we should really say
no to that. Itâs enough. That said maybe the answer is to - my understanding
is that if we maintain the status quo then thatâs even worse for them in the
sense that the steps are being taken that they would consider to make things
better.
So therefore it seems to me that one way of thinking about it is to say, âLetâs
just do what we recommended and work on the rest of it another time or later
or tomorrow or whatever.â But thatâs just my personal view.

James Bladel:

Any other thoughts from the table, Council, Board? I think thereâs some
commonality between this topic and the one we just discussed, which is that,
you know, thereâs gaps or daylight or deltas between recommendations
coming out.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 29

I donât think weâve - we have formal GAC advice on this or are necessarily
expecting it, but I think it is one possible avenue thatâs been hinted at coming
out of Marrakech.
And I think that, you know, from our perspective the GNSO - weâve, you
know, as you mentioned weâve - we worked for a number of years. We had a
number of very spirited debates.
Weâve reached a number of letâs say very constructive but perhaps tenuous
compromises, so to reopen those issues after the fact I think starts to call into
question the integrity of our processes that we use to develop processes, and
to make decisions as a GNSO community and then to ratify those decisions
at the Council.
So itâs, you know, itâs something where we - weâre not trying to put you in a
difficult position but we also want to find a clearer path forward for these
things.
And I think that, you know, we have a number of processes in place to try to
encourage earlier and more substantive coordination and participation by the
GAC and by individual GAC members or the GAC as an organization and to
try to get - to head these things off earlier on in the process.
And thatâs always been the goal but I think that, you know, it - look if weâre
being candid and this is the policy forum and itâs time to put the cards on the
table I just - I donât think we can point to any huge success in that area yet.
Weâre trying but I, you know, I donât think that we could - we have anything to
hang our hats on there. I donât know. Heather.
Steve Crocker:

Youâre touching on a general problem of the pace and rhythm and processes
of the GNSO on the one hand and the GAC on the other hand, and theyâre

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 30

almost as if theyâre not only two different organisms but from two different
planets.
And there is a slight piece of good news - I think not going to satisfy anybody
at the moment. But I think that in general thereâs been movement in the
direction of being more responsive and getting engaged at an earlier time.
But that still leaves us with problems like the ones weâre discussing here of as queued up from all that. So I donât have any magic bullets here to offer
except empathy that itâs not okay for these kinds of problems to fester and
fester and fester, and that is something that does concern us.
I want to make a comment that I hope is not going to be misconstrued. The this syndrome has been of concern for a period of time and should have
gotten more vigorous attention than it has, so in that sense a slight apology.
However Iâll observe and this observation is really one of - a collegial one of
all of us that the past two years have been extraordinarily expensive in terms
of the amount of attention to the transition process, accountability process
and so forth all - which is fine.
But as a consequence a number of things that we would have pushed harder
on have not - have been starved for attention and as I said thatâs not a
negative comment.
Itâs just an observation about where we are. So just speaking for myself my
hope is that we come out of this transition process and weâre not going to
come out of it like a thunderclap.
Thereâs a lot of implementation. Thereâs a lot of things to be sorted out so
even assuming the transition goes through smoothly thereâs still going to be a
long tail on it.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 31

But nonetheless I hope that weâre able as a community as well as the Staff
and the Board to start to turn our attention back to some of these issues that
have persisted over a period of time and we start to bring the processes
together.
So Iâm sorry for that speech but thatâs the kind of thing that - and feel has
been a source of frustration over a period of time. You want toâ¦?
James Bladel:

Well I have Heather and then Bruceâ¦

Bruce Tonkin:

Okay.

James Bladel:

â¦join us. And Heather go ahead.

Heather Forrest: Thanks James. Heather Forrest. In the spirit of frankness and James has
been frank and Steve has just been frank, Iâm not convinced that this is an only an issue of pace.
Iâm not convinced that early intervention is the silver bullet. I really think that
getting involved earlier might just mean we reach deadlock earlier. Weâre all
affected by PDP recommendations and the decisions of Council on those
recommendations and the decisions of the Board on those recommendations.
And when one of us is affected in a way - letâs say affected by Councilâs
decision in relation to PDP recommendations - when one of us is affected in a
way that personally or in terms of our organization isnât an outcome that we
desired or hoped for and then we go to another SO or AC and say, âThis is
not the outcome that we desired. Can you help us get the outcome that we
desire?â thatâs a broken process.
Thatâs a systemic organizational broken process. Itâs going to one part who
says no and the other part who says yes or hoping, you know, lobbying the
other part to say yes and that bothers me.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 32

This is not - we have two issues on the agenda that as James just said are
really two peas in a pod, and I think this is an opportunity to try and nip this in
the bud rather than let it continue. Thank you.
James Bladel:

Thanks Heather. Bruce and then Stephanie and then, you know, we want to
give first crack to Board members but the floor is - well Jonathan.

Bruce Tonkin:

Yes. I think the goal of our organization is to create policies that have
consensus support within the community and the GAC is definitely part of that
community.
I think one of the challenges that Iâm noticing actually is really a problem of
resource limitations and different priorities and I think thatâs whatâs affecting and thereâs a lot of light coming sort of responses.
So one is if you look at the GAC you might look at it at face value and say,
âYou know, itâs got over 100 members.â So obviously theyâve got lots of
people to get stuff done.
If you actually look at that and say, âWell whoâs actually doing the work - the
hard work of, you know, directly participating in a working group or a policy?â
itâs probably five of those - five people - well five equivalent people that are
available from that particular organization.
Then if you look at the GNSO I can see this room. Thereâs, you know,
probably 100 people in this room. I bet thereâs 20 of people in this room that
really do the heavy lifting.
And what you get there is that you then - you might look at the GAC side and
not have their - for their five people that really do the heavy lifting probably all
five of those have been on the - one of the CCWGs would be my guess.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 33

And therefore - but theyâre - maybe theyâve got one person thatâs available to
look at NGOs because thatâs something thatâs important to their constituents.
On this side you might say, âOkay youâve got - obviously you put a lot of this and into privacy and proxy because thatâs something thatâs of interest to this
particular community.â
And so your - of your 20 people you probably had 15 on the CCWG and
maybe youâve got one or two heavy lifters on privacy/proxy. The GACâs got
no heavy lifter on privacy/proxy so they kind of go, âIâm just going to wait until
I get to the end result.
I havenât got time to participate. Iâll wait till youâve done all the hard yards and
youâve worked and you spent a year working on it and now I finally got the
document.
Well Iâve got time to read the document now thatâs it in final form and hey I
donât like it and now Iâll put my advice in.â So I think itâs - thatâs actually
aligning the fact that you need to identify early who are the stakeholders and
youâve got to try and find a way for them to be - to agree to the priorities
because otherwise I think youâll always end up with this problem, because I
think itâs not bad faith.
I think itâs just to - each group is trying to use their resources and prioritize
those for what they think are the important topics.
James Bladel:

Thanks Bruce. Next up I have Stephanie, Jonathan, Greg and if anyone else
wants to get in the queue thatâll probably take us right up into the end of this
session.
So weâll just go David last and then weâll close off with those and Susan.
Okay so David and Susan and then thatâs it so if we could ask folks to keep

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 34

your interventions succinct thatâd be great. Thanks. Weâll get everyone in that
way.
Stephanie Perrin: Thanks. Stephanie Perrin for the record and I totally agree with what Heather
said. I think that the deadlock will move forward. That might be useful and it
might not.
I totally understand that Bruce gets it. There is some frustration here but there
is basically - itâs first among equal so thereâs a trump card being played.
And the point I wanted to raise - and Iâm painfully aware - painfully, painfully
aware that there are people around the table who would cheer resoundingly if
I said, âOkay Iâm quitting.â
But I - this impacts the multi-stakeholder model rather profoundly because
weâre not that stupid. If weâre going to work for five years on something
bringing missing expertise - at least I think I bring missing expertise and
representing civil society, and then itâs to no good anyway because none of
our arguments will ever be heard.
And the careful calibration that takes place during a PDP where thereâs give
and take - thereâs genuine give and take and then that gets trumped. Well
eventually youâre going to leave and that eventually could be quite precipitous
if this happens in a number of PDP areas.
And that impacts whether ICANN has any credibility and then this gets us
back into the Workstream 2 discussions about accountability so I think itâs a
very important topic.
Iâm glad that Steve said what he did because itâs time we address this for
good or ill. Thanks.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 35

James Bladel:

Yes Stephanie thanks and itâs a good point. And Iâd also throw onto the pile
that the next time we put out a call for volunteers to PDPs and folks see what
happened to their work the last time around, the enthusiasm letâs say isâ¦

Greg Shatan:

Yes.

James Bladel:

â¦tempered quite a bit. So Jonathan.

Jonathan Robinson: Thanks James. My - good discussion. I mean, I really appreciated hearing
it and, you know, Bruceâs point about resource, Steve about distraction,
Heather about, you know, whether or not the problem is so sort of structural
or systemic that bringing it forward wouldnât help.
But what no oneâs mentioned is of course that these two examples that weâve
discussed do predate the work of the GNSO-GAC consultation group, which
has done some very good work in the background during the course of all of
this - distractions that Steve talked about, all of the other overarching issues
that weâve got involved in.
And quietly in the background there has been some very good progress. Iâm
not saying it is a silver bullet to quote Heather on this point but itâs - there has
been some very good work about early involvement of the GAC in the PDP
process, some mechanisms put in place to achieve that and of course that is
on the back of the ATRT recommendations to do so.
And Masonâs worked in his capacity as the first GNSO liaison to the GAC
very specifically in that direction, an opportunity to engage and provide that
kind of input to the GAC early on.
So Iâm not saying we wouldâve found these really intractable or challenging
problems any more easy to resolve, but we have made some steps in the
right direction to dealing with this kind of thing earlier in the process and
making sure we are better equipped to do it.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 36

So letâs keep it up but letâs not forget that some work has been done and itâs
rather supported that kind of initiative, and feels to me like that was a long
way forward from if I roll back to the Toronto meeting say in 2012 where the
GNSO didnât even meet with the GAC.
So, you know, we may well have some structural and other challenging
issues but we have made some progress as well. Thanks.
James Bladel:

Thanks Jonathan. And just for clarity, because if I need to apologize to you or
to Mason if it felt like I was throwing your efforts under the bus, it is possible
that weâre not just seeing the fruits of those efforts yet and that we are kind of
chasing a trailing indicator from the - that work and I understand that.
I wasnât - certainly wasnât trying to call you out for those efforts. I think they
are good efforts/good programs. They just havenâtâ¦

Jonathan Robinson: Thanks James and I wasnât taking it as that but I thinkâ¦
James Bladel:

Okay.

Jonathan Robinson: â¦youâre - thatâs a very elegant expression - trailing indicator. I mean, to
some extent these predate that work so - and again on the flipside I donât
think weâve got it all resolved but we have made some progress.
So I wouldnât like us to think that we just simply ignored the structural issues.
We did some good work on that and are doing some good work andâ¦
James Bladel:

Thank you. Greg?

Greg Shatan:

Thanks. Greg Shatan for the record. Iâll point out that I was a member of the
IGO-INGO PDP that was the subject of the first topic under discussion. And I
think that what I see is the two topics that were discussed today with the

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 37

Board are really the same topic just with slightly different facts - specific facts
so itâs really the same story.
And that, you know, weâve come to a certain set of policy recommendations
using our process and then it all got gummed up. So if thatâs the process
thatâs, you know, thatâs in our bylaws thatâs a problem.
Clearly there needs to be a way out of this dead end - this policy collision.
And I remember noting that we were heading into a policy collision when we
were issuing our policy recommendation from the IGO-INGO Working Group
- not the current one but the prior one.
So this is the, you know, the worldâs slowest train wreck and now we have
two train wrecks that are essentially, you know, mimicking each other. Maybe
like Jonathan says we have a way out or itâs not a silver bullet.
I donât know but just to point out that weâve really just had the same
conversation twice, which means that there is a systemic problem.
James Bladel:

Yes thanks. What did he - whatâs the saying? Once is an anomaly, twice is a
coincidence and what, three times is a pattern or something. Itâs - I think if
you start to feel like youâre going down the same tracks and every time you
go down the tracks you end up with the same result. Yes absolutely.
Okay weâve got David and then Susan and then I think weâll saw it off and
thatâll probably take us to the top of the hour. David?

David Tait:

Well yes Jonathan said I think a lot of the things that I was going to say. The
GNSO-GAC consultation group which - was essentially I think partly formed
in response to some of these problems.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 38

We - the - obviously the Red Cross issue has been dragging on for a very
long time, showed a lot of how bad this sort of can be when the GAC and
GNSO come into collision.
Weâve tried very hard to get early input. The only thing in which Iâd - and, you
know, I think a lot has been achieved and a lot of good work on both sides by
everyone involved in that group and especially by Mason whoâs done, you
know, done a great deal of good work in that role.
But I think one way Iâm going to differ is that - and in the PPSAI largely does
not predate that work. Thatâs work that happened post - mostly post all those
processes coming in and it really showed that, you know, weâre still not there,
that the work weâve done there and trying to get GAC early engagement has
still not been fully taken up and is still causing us some problems.
So maybe this is just a, you know, a call to arms to get back into work at that
and see what we can do in terms of dealing with the, I mean, those issues
that Bruce talked about the way the GAC works and does not have the, you
know, use - has different sets of resources to the GNSO and different
processes are very true but weâve - well, you know, they remain problems.
We still need to work on them and even just getting that same level of, âOh I
better read - Iâve got time to read one thing and respond,â you know, if that and if that was the initial issues report as well, you know, we could get that on
the initial issues report as well as the end or something.
You know, even that sort of modest level of early input would hopefully make
a real difference and letâs keep working at it.
James Bladel:

Thanks David. Last word goes to Susan.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 39

Susan Kawaguchi:

Okay. Thank you. So this has been really interesting and some of this

may be my lack of understanding on how the thing - this would work with the
Board in general.
But I guess my, you know, and being a member of the many working groups
over the years Iâve always thought, âOkay weâve finalized this. We give
recommendations to the Board. The Board takes action.â
But Iâm disturbed with the Red Cross IGO acronyms, all of that, that now the
Board is coming back and saying, âWhat do you want to do GNSO Council?â
There - some of thatâs fine because I think working together and compromise
and discussing things are good but we still need the Board to take an action.
The Board has its own processes to follow. GNSO and especially in the
PPSAI Working Group followed those processes to a tee. Now weâre looking
for your advice and input and maybe itâs - maybe we havenât seen GAC
advice yet on the PPSI - AI.
Maybe weâre, you know, jumping the gun here but I really would urge the
Board to think about this and sort of weigh the community and the multistakeholder aspects of our community, and the fact that we followed the
process and now we need to move forward in one way or the other.
James Bladel:

Thank you Susan and thanks to all who contributed to that conversation. And
I think your last point is probably a good as place as any to land on this topic
is that we donât have any GAC advice on this yet.
Itâs a potential but this is just a - an acknowledgement that that could be one
of the potential outcomes of the Helsinki meeting. And we want to essentially
get your thoughts on the Board as to, you know, where you see this going.

Steve Crocker:

Yes. Let me - it wouldnât be appropriate for us to say we hereby make a
decision or weâre going to make a promise to the GAC. But I can say not only

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 40

on my own behalf but on behalf of the entire Board we have - definitely have
heard you and we agree with you that this is not a satisfactory process.
Stephanie suggested that -- what I said before or what someone said -- will
only have the effect of speeding up the train wrecks. Iâm not sure that thatâs a
terrible thing.
Itâs - if weâre going to have train wrecks letâs get them done and then we can
deal with them faster. But I think that we not only have to deal with these
specific issues and agreed and we have to deal with the systemic process.
And as I said earlier my fervent hope is that we can - all of us, not just the
Board but the whole community can start to turn our attention to getting that
kind of work done as opposed to the overlay of how weâre fixing up our
accountability process.
And not that thatâs unimportant but thereâs a limited bandwidth that we all
have, and I would like to see going forward that a year or two years from now
weâre not still dealing with those issues but we are dealing with the kind of
issues that weâre talking about here.
James Bladel:

Thanks Steve and thanks to our visitors from the Board. We can leave this
session a couple of minutes early. I think weâre breaking for lunch now. Is that
correct?
So letâs - thanks again to everyone who contributed on those two topics. I
know theyâre challenging and weâll give you at least 48 hours to solve them.

((Crosstalk))
James Bladel:

If we can stop the recording I think weâre going to break for lunch. Weâll
reconvene - so Iâm checking the schedule here. I believe we reconvene at
1:30 and thereâs going to be a little bit of a shift around the topics.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-27-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation # 8995676
Page 41

Weâre going to move the GNSO review first. Whereâs Marika? Am I saying
this wrong? The GNSO review first. Just to accommodate some of the guests
that are going to come in and some of the subject matter experts that are
going to visit with us for those topics, weâre going to shift some things around
and Iâm looking at you Rinalia.
And then weâll also have a discussion that involves the Co-Chairs of the
Accountability and (Davey) will be coming a little bit later so enjoy your lunch.
Weâll see you at 1:30. Thank you.
((Crosstalk))

END

