ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 1

Transcription ICANN Helsinki
GNSO Cross-Constituency Meeting between the IPC RySG
Tuesday, 28 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
Inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at
The recordings and transcriptions of the calls are posted on the GNSO Master Calendar
page http://gnso.icann.org/en/group-activities/calendar

Greg Shatan:

Welcome to this meeting of - Meeting B or, as we're supposed to call it, the
Policy Forum, is a new meeting. So we're trying new things. So the
Intellectual Property Constituency decided to try having bilateral meetings
between IPC and the Registry Stakeholders.

I'm Greg Shatan. I'm the chair or president -- I don't know why we call it a
president, but we do -- of the Intellectual Property Constituency. To my right
are our co-hosts or co-guests.

Paul Diaz:

Hi, everyone. I'm Paul Diaz, Chair of the Registry Stakeholder Group. Thank
you, Greg. Thank you, everybody, for attending. We're recording this as well,
of course. As we get into it, usual rules. Everybody please remember, state
your name. We know a lot of each other. Many of us know one another. But
let's state your name for the record.

And sorry there's a little confusion about what was on our agenda today.
Greg and I had previously discussed there was interest in talking about rights
protection mechanisms, future rounds. That was the key.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 2

Coming into the weekend or over the weekend, letters and questions about
requirements around PICs was a key theme. So we thought we would add
this to the agenda, actually start today, because many of you didn't have the
advantage to be in the session yesterday that Bruce Tonkin led with
community leaders.

Importantly, that session was recorded and will be transcribed. So, you know,
there's an important issue for many of us. You'll all have the opportunity to
review the record, and staff is working to get that posted quickly. It might
even be up before we leave Helsinki. Do you want to set the stage what the
discussions were yesterday?

Greg Shatan:

Sure. Just, you know, briefly to set the stage - or actually I'm going to ask
Vice Chair Steve Metalitz of the IPC, who sent the email, since he wrote the
email that summarized yesterday's meeting, I assume his recall of it is
superior even to my own. That's an unfair assumption. But in any case, I'll let
Steve kind of, you know, brief us, you know, on kind of what went on overall.

Steve Metalitz:

Thank you, Greg. Steve Metalitz. Let me just back up to say that as Paul
indicated, the meeting that occurred was not a meeting we called. It was
called by Bruce Tonkin - or we were informed of it by Bruce Tonkin with about
24 hours' notice. So we didn't have any input to the agenda or whatever.

One thing that led up to the meeting, I think, was that the IPC had raised a
concern about some statements from the ICANN Board chair that seemed to
say that some of these provisions in the Public Interest Commitment that's up
on the screen were outside of ICANN's remit. And the implication seemed
clear to us that ICANN might be backing away from any compliance activities
with regard to this obligation or obligations in that area.

So one thing that was - and we could go into detail if you wish about what the
statements were. It's in the correspondence that's on the ICANN page. One
thing that did come out of the meeting was that there would be a written

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 3

response from the ICANN Board to our concern, and that it would make it
clear that ICANN is - this is in the agreement, and ICANN is enforcing all
aspects of the agreement, including the Public Interest Commitments.

I think that's important for a number of reasons. But again, let's remember.
This is an obligation that applies only to the new gTLDs. And it's still, I think,
fair to say early days on the new gTLDs about what kinds of problems or
abuses may arise there, and what will be the most effective ways of dealing
with them.

But if we can establish more clearly and unequivocally that this is part of the
obligations that will apply to new gTLD registries, then we can move on from
there to spell out exactly what's involved with this, and how it ought to be what compliance activities ought to take place.

But we thought it was important to get that threshold question, if we could,
clarified. And I'm hoping -- based again on what was said at the meeting -that there will be a written clarification that will be helpful.

So I don't know that, you know, we want to focus solely on this during our
limited time together. But that is kind of a little bit of the context in which this
question arose. Thank you.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you, Steve. That's a fair question for everybody. I mean you may have
heard some buzz about it, or you may be comfortable waiting for written
response to ICANN, which they promised is forthcoming. Do people want to
spend time on this today? Now? Or do we prefer to move to broader issues
about RPMs and future rounds? What's the preference?

Man:

(Unintelligible)

Paul Diaz:

Okay. I mean happy to move on. Just wanted to give everyone the
opportunity in case they hadn't heard yesterday.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 4

Jon Nevett:

Well I think we should talk about it.

Man:

Yeah.

Paul Diaz:

Oh, that's what you meant, talk about it. Sorry. Okay.

Jon Nevett:

This is Jon Nevett. I think we should talk about it actually, because it's an
issue. There's an issue of a level of trust between our groups, and there are
issues that permeate other issues based on this. I think we should have the
discussion.

We have letters here from various members of the IPC and the IPC itself in
April that, in my opinion, attack new TLD registries for not following their
PICs, and attacking ICANN for not enforcing them.

And I think that's a problem, and we should talk about it because, you know,
there's the PIC right up there on the wall. It doesn't say what I think some
members of the IPC say it says. Maybe there should be advocacy on your
behalf of what it should say, or what you want it to say.

But to say that we're in blatant violation of that PIC, and that ICANN's not
enforcing that PIC, is problematic. And it's unfair. And, you know, we're
getting caught in the middle of (Hill) letters back and forth. And, you know, if
you see the letter that came out today, again it's the same thing. New TLD
registries are in blatant violation of their PIC specs, and ICANN's not doing
anything about it. That's not the case. And I think it's a problem. Thank you.

Paul Diaz:

Thanks, Jon. It might help. Can we have somebody on the IPC side just kind
of summarize what's in that letter, the letters that we're referring to now?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 5

Steve Metalitz:

Well the letter from the IPC is the one that I referred to, which raised this
question of whether ICANN was going to enforce the PICs. It did not - correct
me if I'm wrong, Jon, but it did not allege widespread violations of this.

It really got to the question of whether this was something that - we said the
PICs are important, and we were concerned about what the Board had said
about it and so forth. And we talked about how contract compliance in
general was quite important. That's why I think that was the impetus for the or one of the impetuses, if that's the plural, for the meeting yesterday.

You're probably referring to other letters that were sent on behalf of some
IPC members. But I don't know if that was what you were referring to in terms
of getting caught in the middle, or whatever your statement was about what
we had said about registries.

Let me just say from the perspective of my clients and the organizations that I
represent in the Coalition for Online Accountability, that we think there's been
a good level of cooperation in general by new gTLD registries -- and yours
prominently among them, Donuts prominently among them. We're trying to
work together to deal with some of the types of abuses.

Obviously we're not covering the whole waterfront here, but on the kinds that
we're most focused on, which was clear, pervasive copyright infringement, I
think your company has taken some important steps forward, and other
companies have as well, and there are other examples less well-publicized in
which there has been cooperation. So if the impression is that we're saying
something different, I do want to correct that.

Now that said, there are also some registries that we feel are not cooperating.
And there have been complaints to ICANN Compliance. And once it's clearly
established that ICANN has a compliance obligation to enforce this provision,
then I think it becomes much - you know, then we need to talk about what

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 6

exactly it requires; how it lines up; how it came to be; how it lines up with the
GAC advice, for example, that generated it.

But I don't want to give - if you think we've given the impression that there is
widespread non-compliance with this among registries, I don't think that
we've said that. There are some instances of lack of cooperation, lack of
response, that we think are quite concerning. But they're also are certainly
examples to the contrary. I hope that that helps.

Paul Diaz:

Okay, I've got a queue building. Everybody in the room, you know, raise
hand, come to the mics. Paul McGrady, you were first in the queue.

Paul McGrady:

Thanks. Paul McGrady for the record. I think Steve's already done that, but
just to say it more bluntly, there should be, in the minds of people in this
room, a distinction between what the IPC says in its letters, versus what
members who have - by organizations that happen to be members of the IPC
say in their private letters.

There's no way for the IPC to govern what's in a private letter from an
organization which happens to be a member. And so I hope that we are able
to keep that distinction in mind while we talk through the issues. Thank you.

Paul Diaz:

Okay, thank you, Paul. Greg?

Greg Shatan:

Hi, this is Greg Shatan again. I kind of - you know, Paul said a lot of what I
wanted to say. But I think that - you know, first I think my theme coming into
this meeting was fruitful cooperation. And that's where I'd like us to go.
Obviously there needs to be some airing of grievances as well, just as if this
were - I can't remember the name of the holiday on Seinfeld, and apologies
for the culturally specific reference and not remembering it. So apologies
twice.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 7

But in any case, I think it is important to point out that the letter that the IPC
sent, which was back in April 11, so it's coming on its three-month birthday
without a reply from IPC - from ICANN, was specifically, you know, a letter,
you know, concerning Crocker's statements that seemed to, you know, take
arguably all of the concerns of IPC's members out of ICANN's remit entirely.

And, you know, I don't think there are any statements in there that were, you
know, attacking. But in any case, rather than, you know, retread what - you
know, perceived differences, I think it's better to try to work toward common
understanding.

And if, you know, one of those common understandings, you know, may be
or that we can work toward is the view or views of what Spec 11 and - you
know, or Section 3A of Spec 11 constitutes in terms of obligations.

And when we refer to compliance, I tend to think first of small "c" compliance,
not the Compliance Department of ICANN, which is really kind of - at least
implicitly is a non-compliance department -- or it should be. Whether it
actually acts as such is a different discussion.

Rather, compliance should be, you know, willing compliance by a contract, by
a party to a contract, without, you know, the other party having to stand up
and say, you know, we think you're not complying.

So as somebody who's primarily a transactional lawyer during the day, I
have, you know, most of my clients are, you know, in a variety of contracts,
many of which I've negotiated. And as long as they're complying with the
contracts, neither party is questioning the other party's compliance. You
know, obviously we're not a party to the contract that each registry is party to.
ICANN is.

But nonetheless, emphasis on things like, you know, the Compliance
Department and enforcement issues, to my mind, gets things off somewhat

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 8

on the wrong foot as well, since if there is an understanding of what
constitutes, you know, being in compliance with the agreement, worrying
about it - you know, the less you need to worry about enforcement, at least
for those who are, you know, actually, you know, seeking to comply in good
faith with the agreement.

So the more we can think about, you know, having a common understanding
on that, among those who are, you know, interested in compliance -- and
that, you know, should be the vast majority of registries, you know -- the more
we can kind of move off into fruitful cooperation as opposed to the ritual airing
of grievances.

Paul Diaz:

Okay, thanks, Greg. Got a queue going. I had Liz, Lori, Jay and Jordyn. Liz,
go ahead.

Liz Finberg:

Okay. Thanks. Liz Finberg, PIR. As most of you know, we operate both a
legacy and some new TLDs.

And in the interest of common understanding, I will tell you that when I read
Section 3A of Spec 11, and I do see the language that says we have to have
a provision in our RRA that requires registrars to effectively provide notice to
their registrants that they can't engage in technical abuse, and then also I do
see piracy, trademark, copyright infringement, et cetera, and then the key
phrase for me is, and providing consistent with applicable law and any related
procedures.

Procedures related to applicable law clearly speaks to the notion of due
process, clearly speaks, in my view, to a distinction between our remit as
registry operators to mitigate - to, in effect, police and mitigate technical
abuse of the DNS under the security stability obligations of every registry
operator on the one hand, and content-related infringement on the other.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 9

No, ICANN cannot, should not, and the contract cannot and should not imbue
registry operators with the authority to substitute themselves for a court of
competent jurisdiction, and make calls as to what is and what isn't
infringement. That is incumbent upon plaintiffs, you know, rights holders, and
courts. And so that's - in the interest of common understanding, that's where
we're coming from.

Now that said, the next question is, well what does that mean? To me it
means when you give me a court order for the PIR, it would be a US court
order, or a foreign court order that's been domesticated in the US court, we
have an obligation to comply swiftly and completely with that court order, and
we do.

So again, in the interest of common understanding, that's at least one registry
operator's viewpoint. Thanks.

Paul Diaz:

Okay, thanks, Liz. Lori?

Lori Schulman:

Lori Schulman, for the record. I'm an IPC officer, but I'm also the senior
director for Internet policy for the International Trademark Association. And I
think that's important to say before I go into what I'm going to talk about.

One of the letters to which you may be referring is a letter that INTA wrote to
Allen Grogan a year ago, highlighting what we considered to be registry bad
practices in terms of a whole host of behaviors -- name-spinning, holding off
names in the sunrise period, charging premium prices.

I mean there was a long list of what we considered to be actions that were
against the interest of the public in terms of having names out there that
could be confusing, or holding names hostage for higher prices for brand
owners, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 10

So while that may not specifically go to the Spec 11 issue, it does go to the
idea of, you know, the interest of brand owners and content owners to the
extent that we're here, hopefully, to protect the public interest, too, in terms of
preventing infringement and piracy and all that bad stuff out there.

Now so when this meeting was called, we were asked to provide evidence of
abuses. And that is what we provided in a letter, by evidence of this letter, to
the meeting yesterday. I wasn't in the meeting, but our representatives were.
So I don't know if this letter was part of what Paul Diaz is referring to or not,
but this letter exists.

And where we're finding frustration on the registry side is, where are the
common agreements about level playing fields? Where are the common
agreements about what is fair and unfair in this brand new world of thousands
of TLDs, in terms of when brand owners can get in to protect their brands?

And I hesitate sometimes to talk about rights, rights, rights, rights, rights.
Because then what happens is it becomes very self-centered. And reality is
particularly - and I will speak to trademark law because I'm a trademark
attorney, and that these laws are here to protect the public from deception.

Now we do the ultimate that we can do to try to prevent that, by preregistering names when we can; making sure our brands are protected as
fully as they can be up front. But some of the practices that we see coming
from registries and registrars prevent us from doing that.

So what I want to know is if Spec 11 applies or doesn't apply. To Liz's point, if
you take Spec 11 literally, all it requires is a provision. It doesn't even require
enforcement. I mean I find this language quite disturbing. I could put any
provision I want in a contract. I mean presumably I'm obligated to enforce it,
but maybe not. I don't know. Taken very literally.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 11

But at the same time, my membership looks at Spec 11 as, this is where we
have the level playing field. This is where there is an acknowledgment that
there is a place for an intellectual property policy discussion and
enforcement, and a consumer protection outlook -- again, the root of what I'm
talking about through the trademark law.

And if it's not here, where is it? And where should it be? And to say it's not in
ICANN's remit, I'm sorry but we don't accept that at all. Because it is in the
public interest. Consumer protection is in the public interest.

Paul Diaz:

Okay, thank you, Lori. The queue's getting bigger. I have Jay, Jordyn,
Stacey, Marc, Jon and Rubens. And we're halfway through our time, folks. So
I'd ask if we can keep the comments rolling.

Jay Westerdahl:

Yeah, just - I mean as a registry myself, I mean, I read the language and I
think it applies to due process of law. I know there is a lot of passionate
things out in the world that we should be policing, but that's not our job. We're
registries. And if the courts hand us an order that says this is what we've
ordered, we'll do it.

I just don't see how it relates to us other than, you know, allowing for due
process. And any step beyond that, you're asking for something beyond due
process of the law. I think it's just - it's outside of numbering, and it's outside
of names. And I don't think ICANN should be setting up, you know, some kind
of court system outside of the courts.

Paul Diaz:

Okay. Jordyn?

Jordyn Buchanan: Thanks, Paul. Jordyn Buchanan from Google for the record. I like the spirit
that Greg tried to latch onto earlier which is like how do we focus on places
where we can work together? I think that is really helpful.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 12

And thanks for acknowledging that even though perhaps you are – the
(unintelligible) letter was not an IPC vehicle that it is still relevant to the
conversation.

You were a little frustrated earlier when people were saying, oh that is not an
IPC letter. It doesn’t really matter if the people sending it are in the room. Like
we are all just talking to each other right now.
It doesn’t have to be a formal registry stakeholder group versus IPC dialogue.
It is a registry versus intellectual property sort of community discussion I think
will be the most productive way to tackle it.

I do think where I also sort of really thought the initiative about not talking as
much about rights as much trying to get to the sort of best interest of the
public is probably a really useful way to frame these discussions.

I think part of the reasons why registries tend to try to look at the ICANN
function really narrowly because it all does become right. And the sort of
collaborative arrangements that like donuts that Steve referred to donuts
doing with some copyright issues and so on.

Those are hard to do in the ICANN framework because everything gets sort
of locked down into this contractual language and we (unintelligible) what it
means like we have here and so on.

And so I find that when we are working collaboratively it works a lot better.
And I think a good example of this just to reflect back on where we get
frustrated. I have no self-interest here that I am going to talk about GLTDs.
We don’t have any GLTDs. We are not associated with them at all. But we
spent quite a bit of time talking with representatives from IPC early on about
whether we can figure out a practice by which GLTDs could take names like
subway.nyc or corona.nyc or whatever airport.berlin or something like that.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 13

And have those be allocated to city authorities or municipal – probably what
people would think if you saw subway.nyc. You probably think oh I am going
to go on a train not necessarily sandwich shop even though.

And so we really got nowhere I think when we tried to talk with the IPC.
Because this notion of rights kept coming up (unintelligible). We got this
agreement into the guidebook and we are just not going to let it go.

Somehow we need to figure out how to be more collaborative on issues like
that and give and take and just like registries want to step up and want to
make sure that we are helping protect brands and avoid abuse within our ??

I think we have got to make sure that there is give and take on the other side
as well when it is appropriate.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you Jordyn. Stacey?

Stacey King:

Stacey King, Amazon Registry Services. I think one of the things that is
coming up and Liz got to this quite a bit. We clearly have potentially different
interpretations for this clause.

And before we can talk about compliance with a big C or small C. And before
we can say this entity has cooperated and therefore is complying and this
entity isn’t maybe cooperating and defining what cooperation means because
that is a different discussion.

I think we really have to try and come to some understanding of what this
clause means. Otherwise we are all going to have different interpretations
and we are all going to point fingers at each other and it is really going to get
us nowhere.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 14

So maybe we figure out a mechanism and it will clearly take beyond the
session to really come to a common understand of what this means and the
interpretations when it was drafted.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you Stacey. I see you want to get back in Laurie but we have got big
queue. Going to move to Marc.

Mark Trachtenberg:

Marc Trachtenberg for the IPC. First I believe the holiday Greg was

referring to was Festivus for the record.

Second, you know when we talk about due process rights, you know, due
process really involves people’s interactions with the government. Here we
are talking about private agreements. You know registrants enter into a
private agreement with the registrar who is in a private agreement with the
registry.

And so, you know, ideally we all talk about these idealistic due process rights.
But you know I don’t know really to what extent? Even at least from a legal
perspective due process comes into play here. There is no government
involvement.

Going beyond that, you know, I do agree that one of the big problems is we
don’t know what this cause means? Like every clause in the agreements that
ICANN has it is very unclear. That is kind of the standard operating
procedure. So I don’t know what it means either but it has got to mean
something.
It can’t just mean you have to put this provision into a contract because that is
pointless. To have to put a provision into a contract you are not going to
enforce, you know, has no meaning. And to just have the clause mean that a
registry operator or registrar, you know, has to comply with a court order that
is meaningless also.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 15

I mean clearly the registry operator has to comply with the court order. So
why would you have this provision that just says that? So again I don’t know
what it means. But it has to mean something. And I agree with you (Stacy).
We need to get to a point where we can figure out, you know, what everyone
agrees that means. Whether that is right or not.

And that, you know, I think is aligned with what other people are saying. Is
that there has to be some sort of, you know, common alignment and
cooperation in working together.

Because ICANN is not going to help us so we all need to help each other and
just try to figure out some sort of efficient, you know, workable process that
everyone can somehow agree on.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you (Mark). Back to Jon.

Jon Nevett:

Thanks (Paul). Jon Nevett. I think we all know what it means right? We might
not like what it says. We might not agree with what it says. We might want to
advocate for a change. But I think we know what it means.
And what we want to do – some of us want to do is go beyond that. We want
to work with you all to go beyond that and do certain things. A lot of us are
working on the healthy domains initiative. A lot of us are working on other
initiatives. The registrars are working various best practices as well.

We want to be aspirational. And I think the frustration is certainly from my
perspective is when you are looking at our contracts and you are looking at
Compliance with a capital C. And you are looking at enforcement and you are
looking at oh we can take your registry away.

Registrars and registries are going to kind of retrench a little and they are not
going to be aspirational. So for folks to argue that this says something that it

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 16

doesn’t as a mandatory obligation on registry and registrars’ behalf registries
in this case is tough to swallow for some of us.

Whereas as we want to say, all right here is the baseline. Here is what we
have to do. Now let’s talk together about what we can do together to help
solve a problem.
And when we have an argument over what something that is – again clear to
me but some people may not like and they try to argue it says something that
it doesn’t. It is kind of a breach of trust to me.

And it makes harder for those of us who want to do more to get other people
to follow us to do more. And that is the concern and the frustration I think you
are hearing in the room.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you Jon well put. Plus one. Rubens?

Rubens Kuhl:

Rubens Kuhl… I would just like to remind everyone that while we are here
discussing domain registrations at GTLDs most of the abuse or trademark
abuse (unintelligible) is occurring at hosted Web sites which are outside of
what this industry does.
And even these (unintelligible) doesn’t include ccTLDs which operate in their
own capacity. So everything we try here we have a very limited scope and
won’t address where the issues are recurring. The fact that we are discussing
this here is like there is no global license to be a hosting provider.

So there is no way to attack that. So because there is a global license to have
the generic domains that is why we are discussing this.

But even if we could magically make everything disappear from GTLD
domains it would occur at other domains. It would (unintelligible) Web site
with no domain names at all addressed by numeric IP addresses.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 17

And all this would keep happening. So this discussion is somewhat
(unintelligible) to the actual fight that is going on for the (unintelligible). So
let’s try not put appearances first. Let’s try to do something that really
achieves something.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you Rubens. Back to Greg.

Greg Shatan:

Thanks. Kind of respond to some of the things I have heard. First, Jon I agree
with what you say and I think that if you somebody were to start a
conversation with me that they are going to seek to have me disbarred that I
would probably not be all warm and fuzzy like I usually am.

So that is why I try to emphasize common understandings on small C
compliance as opposed to, you know, adjudicating (unintelligible) gaps
through Big C compliance where possible. That itself is a form of I think due
process.

And I think the emphasis on due process meaning only a court order I think is
both narrow and misplaced. Again I think as a transactional attorney in my
day job so I deal with issues where one part of the contract sometimes even
my client is not complying.

And if I were tell the counterparty every time they said, we think you are not
complying with the contract. If I told them to go sue me that also is not a very
helpful way to have a dialogue about whether the contract is being complied
with.

And there is no requirement in any contract that you sue somebody in order
to have a conversation about whether the contract is not being complied with.
So I think kind of this so sue me thing is not also a very good thing although
potentially would enrich many of my colleagues who do go to court as well.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 18

But I don’t think anybody here wants every single think here to be adjudicated
here in court. You know costs will rise and all sorts of things will go down.

In terms of what Rubens said, you know this is not the only conversation. And
I would certainly say as somebody who does deal not in court but otherwise
in terms of abuse and infringement issues we approach every aspect of it.

We approach the registrant. We approach the Web host. We approach the
registrar. We approach the registry. We may deal with law enforcement, you
know, national or international depending upon what the abuse is.

And we deal with what goes on in the legacy TLDs. So the focus here is only
– it is in part because we are all kind of in this new GTLD, you know, bubble
to some extent. That is kind of what is right in front of us.

And of course you know one reason relatively little abuse is occurring the
new GTLDs is because relatively little, you know, few domain names are
registered there relative to those registered in dot com. I am sure everyone in
this room hopes that changes. Indeed is betting on it.

So, you know, we are dealing now with the world as it is going to be not just
the world as it is. So I think the last thing I would say in terms of kind of Step
4 because we are not going to solve all the problems of the world even our
own in the next 10 minutes.

Is maybe a smaller group of us can get together and talk about common
understandings. Because Jon I don’t think we actually really have a common
understanding of what this says and what its implications are.
And I think each party – there may be a number of understandings and
maybe misunderstandings about what the other side’s understandings are.
So I think rather than any of us think that we have got the answer. If we were
all thinking that we all have the same answer we would be eating lunch.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 19

So I think we should get that group together and you know kind of try to hash
this out in ways that we can kind of come to an understanding which I think
will be helpful.

As I say, it may not be the answer everybody loves but at least it will be an
answer that we can try to promulgate and see if more people can live with.
And just like in any situation if you can get the center to hold the fringe gets
more clearly defined as the fringe. Thanks.

Paul Diaz:

Thank you Greg. Registries will definitely take you up on the offer for a small
group to sort through. I have got two more in the queue and we have got
about five minutes. Ellen you are first. Jordyn then and anybody else? And
Paul. Okay and that will be it.

Ellen Shankman: Thank you. Ellen Shankman IPC. I am fascinated by this discussion because
what I am hearing that is coming up to pick up from Jon’s point but also
Jordyn and Stacey and Lori and over here.

How do you think a conversation that goes really to a question of establishing
trust with business models? And what is it that will take because part of it is
consumer trust which is one piece of the thing.

But the other that you talked about Jon I think is true is how do you establish
trust in these conversations? Because you really don’t have – and I think the
concept of trust and the concept of business models are by definition a little
bit difficult to reconcile.

But I think the question and whether it is in a small group of best practices
whatever is I think for people to be able to identify what would help establish
that trust? And then within my business model how much of what you need
from my trust can I give? And I think that that might be a helpful way forward.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 20

Paul Diaz:

Thanks Ellen. Jordyn.

Jordyn Buchanan: So speaking of trust I guess. I was just struck by in looking at this and hearing
Greg say, well we don’t see that much abuse in the new GTLDs. And I
thought why are we talking about this?

Greg Shatan:

That is not what I said. I said relative to, you know, in terms of sheer
numbers.

Jordyn Buchanan: Sure that is fine.

Greg Shatan:

Not in terms of – in terms of percentages it may actually be quite different but
I know that is not (unintelligible).

Jordyn Buchanan: What I heard from Laurie was that of sort of it sounded like real problems that
brand owners were having with the launch of new GTLDs like as they exist
today.

And what you are talking about is we are a little worried in the future we might
have problems related to this. And it just seems like why are we focusing on –
like why are we, why are you focusing our energy on this part of the
agreement?
When you have got I think in my mind maybe not all of the - I am – to be clear
I am not speaking on behalf the registered stakeholder group.

Just my mind I think, you know, some legitimate grievances in terms of how
some TLDs may have launched and how they have handled the allocation of
brands and so on.

I think that is a rich area where you can have a lot of really productive and
interesting conversations because it is grounded in actual facts and actual
problems that we are seeing today.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 21

Whereas, you know, I have been seeing any real evidence that the new
GTLDs are particularly more problematic than any other TLDs in terms of
other types of abuse.

And so why spend our time focusing on that when you have got I think a real
nexus of conversation where we can spend our time.

Paul Diaz:

Okay Paul .

Paul McGrady:

It looked like Steve wanted to respond. No? Okay. So we are all in the
backseat of the car and we are touching each other and it is hot and we don’t
know how long it is going to be until we get to Disney World.

I wonder if before we go here today so that, you know, our parents ICANN
don’t have to turn this car around any second now. If we could set a date
certain where each of us will nominate a small group to have this
conversation.

That we will hear from each other and that we will begin the conversation
informally which might provide a bit of event so that we don’t continue
necessarily you know nasty letters and all this other stuff.

And so if we can maybe before we go can we commit to a number of people
on each side to chat. Chat group and a date certainly we can do that so we
don’t lose the momentum here.

It has been good to air the grievances but I would like to get to the process
about how to deal with it. Thanks.

Jeff Neuman:

Just to respond briefly to Paul. I think maybe if we say July 15 which is a
Friday in two weeks from this Friday it might be a reasonable amount of time
to come up with a team.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 22

And just to respond briefly to Jordyn I think that in any meeting that is short
you are going to end up kind of over focusing on something and it is usually
the thing that got put in front of you by circumstance.
So that is I think while I wouldn’t say that there is no issue around this. I do
agree that all the other things that Laurie brought up and that we didn’t
actually spend a lot of time talking about are a significant set of concerns.

If we had another 45 minutes we would probably stop talking about this and
talk about those. And if we had another 45 minutes about that we would
probably talk about those and not talk about this so anymore.

Jordyn Buchanan: Sure but I guess my point is we do have finite time right? And so we are
about to convene a group to talk about this thing that I think is much less
important and much less to the heart of your concerns than other things that
we can be convening in groups to talk about.
And so I just wonder we don’t have to – we are obviously not going to get to it
here but we should figure out ways to continue this dialogue. And we should
figure out ways to find the places where it is going to be most productive and
helpful as opposed to just like oh this is the thing we are angry about because
some letters flew by last week.

Jeff Neuman:

I think broader dialogue is really ultimately is the point. I think if we just –
taking one thing I think is not the end of finding groups or ways to
communicate. And so I think we try this as kind of an aspect. Maybe not the
most important aspect but I think we should see about using this approach for
other things.

Not necessarily put this thing to the side because there are concerns there
but you know this is not indicative of the biggest issue but just one that is kind
of here.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 23

So I don’t think doing this excludes the kind of, you know, approaching larger
issues and ultimately finding as I say fruitful coordination.

Paul Diaz:

Okay we are at our time and some of the registrars are already here. I know
the IPC just rolls into the next group.

To close out those we have put the 15th for the date given the number of
heads that were nodding about expressed interest. I think we could have as
large or as small as a group we want. Do we want to put a limit? And if so,
what is the number from each side to continue the dialogue?

Or should we just have it open to those that are available and keep the
discussions going?

Jeff Neuman:

One suggestion. Do you think it would make sense to put together two
groups? One to talk about this and then another to talk about new, you know,
about registry rollout issues? That way maybe people assign themselves to
one or the other and we are not going to have so big a group for the one.
And also answer Jordyn’s questions about kind of over focusing on one of the
list as opposed to more. Just a thought.

Jon Nevett:

Two things. Why don’t we start small and just do one group and if we need
two groups or five we can do that.

Secondly, we need a really cool acronym or else it is not going to work.

Man:

Goran said no acronyms anymore.

Jordyn Buchanan: If we are doing one group is the notion that it is just to tackle this? Because I
have zero interest in talking about this issue. I am not going to spend any
time on it.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/3:24 am CT
Confirmation # 8995803
Page 24

I would love to have a dialogue about talking about some of the rollout issues
and so on, you know, broader issues. But if it is just going to be targeted
talking about this I am not going to join.

Jon Nevett:

I was just going to say maybe the group’s charter would be to identify a short
list of issues for future dialogue. And I would suggest July 15th and let’s say
seven on each side roughly.

Paul Diaz:

Fair enough. Sounds good. We were all going to agree with you. Let’s identify
the list of issues with a small group.

And obviously those who are participating the chairs will communicate
regularly with everybody to keep everybody up to date.

All right everybody. Thank you for the time. And it is a good start. A good
outcome of Policy B.

Greg Shatan:

Thank you all.

END

