EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 09:30 to 10:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

OLGA CAVALLI:

Good morning, everyone. Can we take our seats so we can start
our session this morning.
So this is -- Good morning, everyone. This is our meeting with
the GNSO. Welcome our friends from the GNSO to our GAC
room.
The idea of this meeting that will last for one hour is to discuss
GNSO review of GAC Marrakech communique; current review
and policy development work; policy differences between GAC
and

GNSO;

operation

of

the

empowered

community;

appointment of new GNSO Council liaison.
So welcome to our dear friends. So the floor is yours.
We are happy to have you here, and welcome.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you, Olga.

And thank you to the GAC and all the

governments participating, and hopefully you're pleased so far
with the policy forum format.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

OLGA CAVALLI:

Yes.

JAMES BLADEL:

I think we were discussing earlier today that it maybe takes a
little getting used to, a little bit of courage to try something new
but it's working well so far.
So if you don't mind, we can maybe start with some
introductions. For those who don't know me, I'm James Bladel,
chair of the GNSO.
We can maybe start at this end of the table, if that's okay.
With Gema.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Good morning to everyone. This is Gema Campillos from Spain,
one of the GAC vice chairs.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Hi, Jonathan Robinson here as a co-chair of the GAC-GNSO
Consultation Group.

Page 2 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

MANAL ISMAIL:

EN

Manal Ismail, Egypt GAC representative, and co-chair of the GACGNSO Consultation Group, too. Thank you.

HEATHER FORREST:

Good morning, my name is Heather Forrest. I'm the vice chair of
the GNSO retching the noncontracted parties house.

MASON COLE:

Good morning, my name is Mason Cole. I'm the GNSO liaison to
the GAC.

HENRI KASSEN:

Good morning, Henri Kassen, GAC vice chair.

WANAWIT AHKUPUTRA:

Wanawit Ahkuputra, GAC's vice chair.

DONNA AUSTIN:

Donna Austin, GNSO Council vice chair for the contracted parties
house.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you. And I note that we have, as well as those here at the
table, we have a number of other representatives and
councillors from the GNSO community in the audience and

Page 3 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

would encourage them to also participate in the conversation as
well, if they can find their way to a microphone.
So if there are no objections, we can dive right into the agenda. I
think we have a slide here, and I have this, so we can move
through the agenda. And we've already done that.
So we were asked to come prepared to discuss the status of
some various PDP, those are policy development process,
activities within the GNSO, some of which have been identified
as having particular interest by the GAC.
So with those, we can start a little bit to discuss, I believe, really
any of these.
First is that the three large PDPs that are currently under way,
the first being the new gTLD subsequent procedures, which is
identifying the issues and the processes necessary to look at
another round of new gTLD applications and allocations. We
have next generation registration data or directory services,
RDS.

And, see, even I get caught up by the acronyms

occasionally.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Page 4 of 47

We all do.

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

JAMES BLADEL:

EN

And this is to take a look at the -- a holistic look, top to bottom,
of the WHOIS system as it exists today, identify the needs and
uses for that, and make recommendations on whether or not
any wholesale improvements are needed to that system.
And then the third one is a review of all rights protection
mechanisms in gTLDs, which includes the new rights protection
mechanisms that were included for the 2012 round of gTLDs; like
the URS, Uniform Rapid Suspension; the procedures to
challenge the PICs; public interest commitments; as well as the
older and more established rights protection mechanisms, like
the UDRP.
So all of those are under review, and that -- I think the one note
that I would like to raise with regard to this PDP is each of these
is expected to be a very significant -- a significant undertaking
with, in some cases, hundreds of participants on the PDP. It
could be multiple phases lasting several years.
So this is -- We talk about volunteer workload on the
community. These are very, very significant work units that are
currently under way within the GNSO community.
And when we say GNSO community, they are GNSO processes
but they are open to all in the ICANN community, including
members from the GAC.

Page 5 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

So I don't know if you wanted to discuss any particular issues
associated with those three. There's also the IGO/INGO curative
rights PDP, but I will confess to knowing a little bit less about
that one.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, James. Please, I'm in your hands, also.
I think that the new gTLD issue in general, the starting of the new
PDP, is an interesting thing for the GAC. And as we still have
some work undergoing about reviewing what happened with
geographic names and with other sensitive issues related with
new gTLDs, perhaps you can give us some more information
about the timeline and the process of it.
I don't know if, Manal, that she's following up other issues. Do
you want to add something to that?

JAMES BLADEL:

Okay. Thank you.
And we were just discussing that these are just getting started. I
think that this one in particular was organized earlier this year,
probably right around the time of the Marrakech meeting. It has
had I believe two sessions here at the -- in Helsinki, and is
beginning its work.

Page 6 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

If you can take a look at the slide here, I can tell you that we are
now in -- and it's very small print, but if you can see stage 4
where a policy working group has been formed.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Okay. This is the high bar?

JAMES BLADEL:

This is the tall one, exactly. And that is an indication of the work
units that are currently under way as part of a working group.
They then, when they're completed, move to the council
deliberations. You can see that we're not very busy right now.
That's the joke.
And then move to pending for board ratification and then
implementation.
So when we complete these over the next -- Yes. We have Jeff.
Perfect, yeah. And then we move into implementation.
So we do have one of the co-chairs of, I believe, the new gTLD
subsequent procedures. Hey.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 7 of 47

Hi.

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

JAMES BLADEL:

EN

Manal, you've changed.
For that PDP in the room. And, Jeff, if you can make your way to
a microphone.
I believe we also have some of the members that are leaders of
some of the other PDPs as well.
So, Jeff, if we could get an update, maybe three minutes. Give
us an idea of your timeline.

JEFF NEUMAN:

Yeah, thanks. This is Jeff Neuman, one of the co-chairs of the
subsequent procedures, or others called it the New gTLD
Working Group.
As we presented yesterday, there is a work plan in effect. The
hope is to get a preliminary report out by mid next year, 2017,
and finish it up by the end of 2017.
And to respond to, yes, there's other work that's going on, other
reviews. And this working group has taken a particular interest
in the outcomes of those groups and is watching those groups
carefully and will take the inputs of those groups, including the
CCT review team, the geographic -- I'm going to get the acronym
wrong, Heather, but the uniform -- the U -- the Cross-Community
Working Group on country and territory names, the output of

Page 8 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

that group as well as the output of -- that Phil Corwin will
address on the rights protection mechanism PDP.
So these are all ongoing, and I do believe, as does the working
group, that there are issues that we can address even before
those are finalized as they are outside the scope of those other
groups.
So we are certainly mindful of all the other work that's going on,
but working towards producing results by the end of 2017, early
2018.
Thanks.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you, Jeff.
And if we could, Phil, you into service for a similar update on the
rights protection mechanism review.

PHILIP CORWIN:

Yeah. Phil Corwin. I'm going to sit while I speak but here I am.
I am a GNSO Councillor from the business constituency. Let me
first -- since Jeff just spoke, I'm one of the three co-chairs of the
new working group on the review of all rights protection
mechanisms and all gTLDs. We are coordinating our work with
that of Jeff's working group on subsequent procedures.

Page 9 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

We just began our work in March. We held a cross-community
conversation on Monday afternoon. We're holding a working
group session tomorrow morning at 8:00 a.m.
We have a very extended timeline. We -- The first -- We have a
two-phase work plan. The first phase is to review all the rights
protection mechanisms created for the new TLD program.
We've begun with a review of the post-delegation dispute
resolution process which has never been used. We're trying to
find out why it hasn't been used and whether it's a solution in
search of a problem or whether there are impediments to
effective use for real problems.
We'll then be reviewing the trademark clearinghouse, sunrise
registrations, trademark claims notices and uniform rapid
suspension. We project completing those reviews mid-2017 and
producing a final report and recommendations for phase one by
the end of 2017.
And then beginning in January 2018, beginning phase two of our
work, which is the first ever review of the uniform dispute
resolution process, the only ICANN concensus policy that has
never previously been reviewed. And we have not yet tried to
project how long that will take, but it will be a considerable
undertaking, so I think it will probably take at least as long as
the new TLD RPMs.

Page 10 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

Let me also speak -- I also co-chair the working group on
curative rights processes for international intergovernmental
organizations.

My co-chair, Petter Rindforth, from the

Intellectual Property Constituency is sitting right behind me.
We began that exercise I think about a year and a half -- two
years ago. We've really been on hold for the last year, since the
Buenos Aires meeting, because after rapid progress, we had to
confront the issue of what is the recognized scope of sovereign
immunity for IGOs, and we had no expertise within our working
group on that subject.
We obtained some funds from ICANN and just received a final -the final report, a 32-page legal memo, very extensive and
documented from Professor Edward Swaine of George
Washington University Law School in Washington, D.C.,
discussing the sovereign immunity issue in the context of
curative rights processes.
We held a working group session yesterday afternoon. We had
good participation from WIPO, OECD, and the World Bank and
we welcome that. And we did have a conversation with the GAC
chair and vice chairs last year on this.
So we're going to be moving forward, now that we have the legal
advice, moving forward and hope to reach final conclusions
before the end of the year.

Page 11 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

I will say that it would make our job easier if we knew before we
completed our work the final conclusions of the board
discussions with the GAC and the small IGO group regarding
preventative measures for IGO full names and acronyms
because I'm not endorsing any particular outcome when I say
that the broader the scope of those preventative measures, the
less need there will be for curative rights processes at the
second level. But we will do our best, but it would assist us
greatly if that parallel process reached a conclusion before the
end of our -- of our working group's efforts.
And I'll stop there, and I hope that's been informative. I'd be
happy to answer any questions. Thank you.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you, Phil, for those two updates. Thank you, Jeff, for your
update. The fourth item is the next generation registry directory
services. I don't know we have any of the leadership of that
particular PDP here in the room. Susan, I see. If you could -- and
Chuck.

Chuck, would you mind finding your way to a

microphone, and you can give us a couple minute update? Just
off the cuff.

Page 12 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

CHUCK GOMES:

EN

Sorry for the delay. Chuck Gomes speaking. I'm chair of the next
generation registration directory services PDP. And as I think
most of the GAC members know, we had a cross-community
session Monday afternoon and a regular working group meeting
yesterday morning. Let me start by saying -- by thanking all the
GAC participants who were in the cross-community session and
for the GAC participants who are participating in the working
group, the leadership team, and there are three vice chairs and
two ICANN staff, and we've been very pleased with the
participation from the GAC.
Now, where we're at right now, we have an approved work plan
and we're finalizing a list of possible requirements that we
understand that the GAC will be responding to that in a few
weeks. And we're just getting ready to started deliberation on
those requirements for an RDS system. The -- it's going to take
us quite a while to deliberate. I think all of you know the history
of WHOIS. We've been talking about WHOIS for over 15 years in
the GNSO. But the exciting thing is that we've got very large
participation from the whole community and -- including the
GAC. And so we -- we will just be plugging away to make
progress. Now, people like to hear time estimates. It's going to
take us quite a while because it is a controversial issue, but the
continued participation of the GAC is greatly appreciated in this.
And we've had two outreaches so far. The first one the GAC gave

Page 13 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

us their responses. We're actually drafting responses to your
input. And probably those will be coming back to you in the next
couple of weeks. And we'll be looking forward to the -- to your
input on the second request for information in the next few
weeks. And thanks, last of all, for the fact that we have a person
who's serving as a GAC liaison to keep the information flow
going both ways.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you, Chuck. So whether it's the requirements capturing
and the communication via the liaison into the RDS or whether
it's feedback from the discussions between the board and the
GAC into IGO protections or just generally speaking, the
underlying theme here is we want and need desperately GAC
participation, GAC feedback, into these PDP processes.

It's

going to improve the quality of the output, it's going to uphold
the integrity of the process, and I think it's going to lead to a
much faster and more expeditious development and adoption of
the new policies. So if you have any questions about how to get
involved, you can capture me or any of the folks that have given
these updates, and we encourage you to please do so and share
your views.

Page 14 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Maybe just to add to this -- good morning -- we are doing all our
best to augment the participation of the GAC in the PDPs. We've
been making lists on who could go where, who would have the
resources to go where.

We've been slightly taken by the

transition work, as most of us in other communities, but we're
confident that we will be more present. Thank you.

JAMES BLADEL:

So any comments or questions from the room, from any of the
GAC members or participants? Any of the visitors from the
GNSO? Maybe it's too early in the morning.
[ Laughter ]

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

U.K. U.K., please.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes. Thank you, Chair. And thank you, GNSO, for joining us
today. It's very helpful to have this update on the current PDPs.
I just actually have a question for my information, and forgive
me if I've failed to pick up the messages. It's about the timeline
for the rights protection mechanisms and review and what the
next opportunity is for us in consultation with our intellectual
property agencies to -- to input into the review of the rights

Page 15 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

protection mechanisms, trademark clearinghouse and so on.
It's just a point of information I'd like, if you would be able to
provide that. Thank you.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you, U.K. Phil, are you still available and would you like
to take a shot at answering that?

PHILIP CORWIN:

Sure. I was walking back to my seat. Could I ask for the short
synopsis of the question so I know I'm responding
appropriately?

JAMES BLADEL:

I think it's about asking specifically what the timeline is or the
window to provide input into the rights protection mechanism
PDP.

PHILIP CORWIN:

Okay. As I explained, it's a two-phase process. The first phase is
consideration of the new TLD rights protection mechanisms.
We've just begun by looking at the Post-Delegation Dispute
Resolution process. Next up will be trademark clearinghouse
and then the two derivative-related RPMs, sunrise registrations
and trademark claims notice. And we'll wrap up with Uniform

Page 16 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

Rapid Suspension. That process will take us through the mid
2017. So there's plenty of time for input, and then we'll be
taking the second half of 2017 to put together our final report
and recommendations.
Phase two of the working group process will launch -- it's
projected to launch in January 2018. We'll begin our review of
the UDRP. So that's the timeline. And there's -- we've just begun
the substantive work so there's plenty of time for input, and we
welcome it. Thank you.

HEATHER FORREST:

Thanks, James. Heather Forrest. As a member of both of these
PDPs I know we did this yesterday in our initial discussion of the
subsequent procedures working group to ensure that we quite
loudly and clearly welcome GAC members to participate in these
two PDPs. It would be very, very helpful to have you join us in
these efforts and use that as an opportunity to express your
views. So I encourage you all to join both of these PDPs, RPM
and subsequent procedures. And would also note for the folks
in subsequent procedures on behalf of Jeff that this working
group will be meeting today, be meeting in fact soon after this
session and then again after lunch. Thank you.

Page 17 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

JAMES BLADEL:

Spain.

SPAIN:

Thank you very much. About this working group on all rights
protection mechanism, I read in the briefing that has been
prepared for us that the charter for these working group
envisages to address several issues that I think are important for
the GAC. I would like to have confirmation as to whether this is
right, this is effectively envisaged to -- to be dealt with. I'm going
to read the -- the sentences. Are free speech and rights of noncommercial registrants adequately protected? Are last names
and geographic places adequately protected so they are
available to all to use and allowed under their national laws?
Examine the protection of country names and geographical
indications, and generally indications of source, within the rights
protection mechanism. Is the working group going to tackle
these things in the phase two UDRP? Thank you.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you, and for a specific answer I think generally they will
take on those questions if they are raised as part of the input
from the GAC into this work but, you know, I can defer to Phil if
they are specifically outlined as part of the charter and remit of
this PDP.

Page 18 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

PHILIP CORWIN:

EN

Yeah, on that point, attached to the charter, which is available
online, there is a list of non-exclusive questions already raised
by the community for each of these RPMs, both the new TLD
RPMs and the UDRP. But that is a non-exclusive list. We don't
consider it final in any way and we anticipate and expect that
additional questions will be raised by working group members
and by the community as we proceed.
In regard to each question, in some cases there may be a
question as to whether the issue raised is within the scope of our
charter, but particularly in regard to the UDRP, we anticipate
evaluating the charter before initiating phase two in early 2018
and if there's a legitimate need to ask the council to acquiesce to
a revision of the charter to encompass questions that have been
raised that we think are important and within the general scope
of our effort, we'll -- we're certainly willing to look at that and to
take that step. So I think most of the issues you mentioned
would be in scope and we'll take -- if they're raised by
community members, members of the GAC, we'll take them very
seriously and address them.

JAMES BLADEL:

Page 19 of 47

Thank you, Phil. Next is Donna.

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

DONNA AUSTIN:

EN

Thanks, James. Donna Austin. I guess I have a question for the
GAC in terms of participation in PDP working groups. I think
that, you know, the GNSO is very much aware that individual
governments can't speak on behalf of the GAC and that the GAC
will try to provide input into PDPs as the GAC. The question I
have is, is it feasible or possible or something that individual
GAC members consider that they would participate in PDPs, you
know, representing their own governments? And I know in the
past that there have been some members of the GAC that have
participated in working groups in their individual capacity, not
as the GAC. So I guess I'm interested to understand, because -and I'll just take a little bit of a step back. It would be helpful
when we're going through some of this stuff, particularly on
WHOIS, to understand where there are differences in national
legislation that can potentially impact some of the discussions
we're having. And I understand that it's potentially difficult for
the GAC to come up with a consolidated position on anything
like that because of the differences you have individual -individually within your country. So I guess it's just a question,
we -- we understand the challenges that the GAC has in
participating in PDPs, but is there any interest or discussion that
you have at any point in time about individual governments
participating in PDP working groups?

Page 20 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you, Donna. I think there will be no formal, let's say, GAC
representation in the PDPs because that's probably not
possible, apart from maybe some exceptional cases. So you -hopefully you will have more than one individual governments
that reflect some of the diversity in case there is diversity on
legal backgrounds and other things. And, of course, they will try
and inform you if they know about what is going on or what the
situation is in other country. But we have to see how many will
be present in which PDPs. That also depends on the workload
and so on and so forth that we will discuss tomorrow afternoon.
But we'll do our best to communicate as intensely. And also, the
facts can be communicated always. And whereas our structures
basically foresee we advise the board after you finish your PDPs.
We are very happy to follow the invitation to comment as early
as possible, and we'll have to see how well or what is the best
way to come in when with what. But yeah, let's take it that we
try our best to communicate as good as we can.
Iran.

IRAN:

Page 21 of 47

Yes, good morning. Thank you very much.

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

I think your question perhaps should be some sort of
encouragement other than a requirement.

Participation is

already something good if we could further promote that. Not
putting that if you participate and then you just speak on behalf
of the government, yes, if they can, they do. But sometimes they
could -- they prefer to just contribute as a participant, which has
been helped and in helping all process. Perhaps we should put
it in that context. Thank you.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you. We had Petter, and then I think we are halfway
through. We want to start to go to some of the other topics.
Thanks.

PETTER RINDFORTH:

Petter Rindforth.
Just as a practical note, it's always possible to join as an
observer. That will give you continuous update of what's going
on in the working group.
And then you can either afterwards, after a while, go in as an
ordinary member or still as an observer reach out to the chairs of
the working group with specific questions and issues. So that's
also a practical way to do it.

Page 22 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you. Okay. We're about -Oh, we have U.K.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Sorry. I don't mean to hold things up. But just to illustrate
another modality, if you'd like, the GAC working group on
human rights and international law, we are trying to identify
volunteers to engage with PDP processes. For example, the new
registry

directory

services

PDP,

we

are

looking

for

representatives for the working group to participate and report
and interact. So that's a modality that we are developing in that
particular context as one example. Thank you.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you. Good example.
Okay. We're about halfway through our session, and I know that
-- it's good that we had such a spirited and engaged discussion
on this topic.

It shows, I think, an indication that there's

significant interest in these areas of work.
I would note that, however, besides the active PDPs, we have a
couple of PDPs that are waiting for board approval and then we
have a couple that are moving into the implementation phase.

Page 23 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

We don't have time to dive into them now but wanted to make
you aware that those are subsequent processes that follow the
adoption of a PDP.
So let me see. I think we have some background slides here that
we can now -- we've probably already covered this information.
So if you bear with me while I time travel here a little bit.
Go ahead, Mason.

MASON COLE:

Thank you, James. Just one point on the slides, I am happy to
make this slide deck available to everyone on the GAC and I'll be
happy to forward that to the GAC secretariat so it's available to
members of the GAC for background.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thanks, Mason.
Let's see. We're just kind of zipping through these here.
Now we can move to the consultation group, which I think was
another item on our agenda. So if you don't mind, we have the
two members of the consultation group here, Jonathan
Robinson and Manal.
If you don't mind, Jonathan, can I turn it over to you?

Page 24 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

EN

Not at all. Thank you. Mason, Manal, and I will provide you with
a brief update jointly. We've got three slides really, and the first
one talks about the current status and a brief reminder of where
we came from on this.
The origins of this were both an initiative, I guess, originating
within the GNSO but also very cognizant of recommendations
from both the previous Accountability Transparency Review
Team recommendations about earlier GAC involvement in GNSO
policy development activities.
So our purpose or our objective was to explore and enhance and
develop ways in which we could effectively work together. And
we've really worked on this over probably the last two years or
so going back to a point where our meetings together were not -well, in fact, at one point, I think, in 2012 meeting we didn't
actually even meet together.
So I'm personally just, as a quick personal note, very encouraged
by the tone and substance of this meeting, the fact that we are
collectively engaged with the policy development process.
In any case, we set up the consultation group and started to
work. As you see on bullet 2 there, we split the work into two
key tracks of activity: Enhancing the sort of day-to-day ongoing

Page 25 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

collaboration and coordination of the work between the two
groups and, in particular, focused on GAC early engagement in
the actual GNSO policy development process.
To date, we've produced a number of outcomes which have
been, in my view -- and I hope you'll share this -- productive.
We've implemented from a trial to a permanent basis liaison
from the GNSO to the GAC. That's been filled by Mason Cole over
on my right there who you've got to know much better over the
last while.
And the purpose of that is to enable you to have regular updates
and information and knowledge of PDP work such that you can
more readily get involved in PDPs and/or at the relevant times in
PDPs that's most effective to the GAC.
We've also implemented as part of the issue scoping
recommendations a so-called quick-look mechanism where you
end up with a flash of the activity and opportunity to get a good
initial oversight of what's going on in the PDP.
There are monthly updates, so-called one pages, that are
coming through and they highlight what's sort of coming down
the tracks, as it were. And then there are joint GAC-GNSO
leadership calls taking place prior to the ICANN meetings, or as
necessary. And, in particular, you can see that the benefits of

Page 26 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

that are something like this meeting where it's been thought
through and structured and hopefully presenting information
that's of particular relevance and timeliness to the two groups.
So that should give you a feel of very briefly where we've come
from and the sort of work we've been doing and what the
deliverables to date are. And with that, I'll hand over to Manal.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you, Jonathan.
If we go to the next slide, please.
So being where we are, we thought this is a good moment to
conduct a survey to update input on the experiences to date
with the quick-look mechanism and seek additional suggestions
and ideas for opportunities for GAC engagement in later phases
of the PDP.
We've got 30 responses to the survey, 13 from the GAC and 17
from the GNSO. And we are very thankful to each and everyone
who have spared the time to respond to this survey and provide
us with valuable comments and feedback.
So not all questions were answered by everyone, but still we
found the feedback to be very useful.

Page 27 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

On the quick-look mechanism, just to give you the sense of how
the survey results are -- and still you have the survey available.
You can check the details online.
So over 60% of those who responded to this agreed that the
quick-look mechanism has positively contributed to the early
GAC engagement.

And there were interest also from some

respondents to explore additional engagement opportunities in
other -- in later phases of the PDP. Initially, we were focusing on
the issue scoping and the very early phases of the PDP.
So the consultation group is still to review the survey results and
take those into consideration in our next steps. And with this,
again, as I said, the survey is online. The results are online, too,
if you want to get a clearer vision of how the responses were.
And with this, I'll hand back to you, Jonathan, for the next steps.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Thank you, Manal.
Next slide, please.
So this is the final of the three slides.
The consultation group will reconvene. We'll get back together
again immediately or shortly after this meeting here in Helsinki.
And really I think we see our purpose now to try and complete

Page 28 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

our work by the next ICANN meeting in Hyderabad. That's our
objective in any case and to present the final results to the GNSO
and the GAC. We don't see ourselves as being a group with an
indefinite life. We feel and hope that you will agree that we've
made some quite significant progress, and we'd like to, you
know, let that continue. And if in the future, there's a need for a
similar group, of course, that's not precluded.
And our expectation is then that the ATRT3 group, which will be
formed in due course and undertake its work, will review these
improvements that have been made and assess their
effectiveness.

No doubt there may be some other

recommendations, but we hope that they will be able to
recognize that we are in a better place and have fulfilled at least
some of what was required or requested from the outputs of the
previous ATRT groups.
So that's really it from us. I hope that's been a useful and
succinct update. Manal would like to have a final word.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Just a quick addition on this last bullet just for those who don't
know where the ATRT comes from in this context. This initiative,
the GAC-GNSO -- the early engagement of the GAC and the GNSO
PDP was an outcome of ATRT1, and then the consultation group
was formed with ATRT2.

Page 29 of 47

And this is why, as Jonathan

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

mentioned, we're expecting that ATRT3 will be reviewing what
we have achieved so far. So thank you.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Thank you, Manal. I think that concludes our update. So I'll
hand this back to our chairs.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Manal and Jonathan. I think the GNSO-GAC
consultation group has made a significant contribution in filling
this gap in your early engagement. And I think the quick-look
mechanism is a very good tool.
And the challenge, however, is always that the structures are
only as good as the resources you have to actually fill and live
them. And I think we are now at a point that you allude to as the
end of your presentation that I think we have now enough
structures, enough processes, and there's no urgent need for
developing new ones. For the time being, we have to make sure
that these processes and these channels that we have built now
in terms of communication and exchanges, that they are
actually used and we have to concentrate on using our
resources in the GAC to use these processes. And at a later point
in time, it may be useful if we then again would find another gap,
that we would reactivate the group. But I think so far the group

Page 30 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

has done an excellent job and has given us the structures that
we need. Now, we need to use them. Thank you very much.
Any comments or questions on the consultation group and its
work?
So everybody's happy. We take the silence as a big thank you to
all of you.
India.

INDIA:

Thank you, Chair. So let me begin by we appreciate the work
that the GNSO has been doing, and we appreciate that the GNSO
has reviewed the Marrakech communique.
Where we are particularly interested in is the issue of local
language and in the new gTLD subsequent procedures PDP.
You have made a mention that not only the registry but also the
registrars must focus on, you know, the IDN issue, the local
language support issue.
So we in India are having a huge challenge, we face a huge
challenge because we are trying to bring on users to the Net in
15 languages which are non-Latin based. And perhaps around
the room also this could be a concern to some of the countries
who communicate in a non-Latin script.

Page 31 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

So we have this huge challenge of bringing out an ecosystem
where we have email support and browser support on these
scripts, so perhaps this could be an area of focus as we go
forward and we could also see which countries have an interest
in this and see how we can factor this in as we go forward. And
we would like to be associated with that. Thank you.

JAMES BLADEL:

Thank you. That's an important point. I think that as part of the
next subsequent processes associated with the next round of
new gTLDs, internationalized scripts are a priority. They were an
important component of the previous round. I expect that will
grow in the second round.
I think to your second point regarding support for email and
browsers, that is an additional -- an additional challenge
referred to, I think, internally as "universal acceptance." I note
that that is -- there is some involvement and ICANN is sponsoring
some industry groups that are working on that problem and
trying to build a greater sense of awareness amongst software
developers and operating systems and mobile systems and
infrastructure fabric to help build out universal acceptance.
So I would encourage you to reach out to that group as well,
which is not necessarily a formal structure within ICANN but it is
-- but it's meeting regularly in conjunction with ICANN meetings

Page 32 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

to address that problem specifically. Because you're absolutely
correct. That is a barrier to adoption outside of the Latin scripts.
Do we have any other questions? I note that we are down to our
last 15 minutes and we did skip over -- that's my fault, Thomas. I
went too quickly. So if you don't mind, I'll back up a couple of
slides and we can talk a little bit about the exchange of views on
the outstanding issues for Red Cross and IGO recommendations.
And do you want to introduce this topic?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

No. Actually, I want to start by asking you a question.
As you know, we have touched a little bit on the IGO protection
in a previous discussion earlier in this session. With regard to
the Red Cross, this is -- there are some similarities between it,
too. Not everything is identical because the legal basis, and so
on, for protection is different.
We just thought it may be worth it to have a quick exchange and
see where we are on this because I think we both -- and we
discussed this earlier -- we have a common interest in arriving
from

temporary

mechanisms

to

sustainable,

durable,

permanent mechanisms that create the clarity, I think, that
everybody wants.

Page 33 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

There are still differences in terms of where this is procedurally,
what is expected from the board, and you have produced a
letter shortly to the board.
Maybe we can start with that and ask you how you see the next
steps in this issue with regard to arriving at something
permanent and stable.

JAMES BLADEL:

So thanks. And I know that we probably have some other folks
from the GNSO that might want to weigh in on this topic as well.
Just from my perspective, we sent a letter to the board in
response to some consultations that we had with members from
the international Red Cross, both in Marrakech and at our GNSO
Council meeting in April.
The challenge is that from our perspective in the GNSO, that this
issue has been stuck for several years. In fact, we were taking a
quick headcount and noting that most of us on the council
currently were not on the council when this -- when this PDP was
formally adopted, so that just gives you an idea of how much
time has elapsed. And our goal was --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 34 of 47

But the Red Cross was still there.

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

JAMES BLADEL:

EN

The Red Cross was still there. In 2013. Yes, they were.
So -- but the point being that we had to get up to speed,
refamiliarize ourselves with the issues, and also sort of restart or
reboot that effort and get it -- get it back in front of the board.
Where we're going from here is that we've specifically asked the
board for guidance on what their intentions are in terms of
making -- you know, if they intend to either accept our
recommendations or accept them partially or -- or reject them.
Because we have mechanisms for each scenario, but -- but we
need to -- we don't want to necessarily presume the outcome.
So I think that for the most part, our letter was asking the board
-- reminding them that we are awaiting some movement or
some disposition from them before we can move forward on this
issue; that we are essentially waiting for them to make the next
move.
And I don't know if anyone else at the table or from the GNSO
would like to weigh in on this topic, but it is something that we
are also keenly aware -- keenly interested in seeing that move
forward and having these temporary measures replaced with
something a little bit more permanent and sustainable.

Page 35 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think this is useful for the GAC to know, so, yeah, I
see there are a few hands up, so please make your comments or
raise your question.
I have Iran, the U.K., and the OECD. Thank you.

IRAN:

Just a simple question. After your letter to the board, has there
been any follow-up action? Thank you.

JAMES BLADEL:

Not yet, no. U.K.?

UNITED KINGDOM:

Thanks. Well, you know, this has been going on, as I think you've
acknowledged, for a huge amount of time, and when you're
talking about the Red Cross/Red Crescent movement, you're
talking about the humanitarian organization that has to deploy
resources to combat abuse.
Is there any action happening -We appreciate your attention to this.

That's very well

appreciated. But, you know, is there something happening at
this meeting, for example, in Helsinki that you can update us on
in that respect so that we can report back to our -- not only to

Page 36 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

the ICRC but also to our national Red Cross entity in the U.K. and
elsewhere? Thank you.

JAMES BLADEL:

So first off, there are temporary measures in place for protection
against abuses. I don't want us to think that we are exposed
during this interim time. But I think, Heather, if you want to
update on activities at this meeting?

HEATHER FORREST:

Thank you, James.
We should note that in James' answer to the question "Has
anything happened since our letter of 31 May," no, not formally,
but we did meet with members of the board yesterday and this
was one of the issues that was raised. It was one of two issues
that was raised. And the board members present noted our
concerns that were outlined by James in terms of the position
that we're in.
Please understand, as James said, those of us sitting on the
council are not, by and large, those who voted on the
recommendations that were made by the PDP working group.
There is a process that's outlined in the bylaws.

The PDP

working group puts forward recommendations, those are put

Page 37 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

forward to the council, and they go to the board. And that's
where we sit.
So insofar as the GNSO Council, we've done what we can do. We
pushed the board in our meeting yesterday and we'll continue to
push the board.

JAMES BLADEL:

And OECD.

OECD:

Thank you. I'd just like to echo those same concerns that the
issue for IGOs also remains unresolved.
In particular, with the point to the -- regarding the fact that the
current members of the GNSO actually weren't there when the
initial PDP happened, you know, the IGOs are still around. We're
very familiar with these issues. If anyone ever wants to pick up
the phone or send us an email, we'd love to have a conversation
with people and just bring everyone up to speed. There's been a
great deal of concern on all of our behalves that there's a little
bit of -- a lot of misinformation flowing around and I think
maybe some misunderstandings of what we're actually looking
for and the degree to which IGOs are willing to be flexible on
certain issues and also why some of the issues are important to
us.

Page 38 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

So I think communication is really the key in order to bring a
timely resolution to this issue.
And in that regard, I'd like to note the work of this small group
that's been going on in some semiofficial capacity since the Los
Angeles meeting in 2014, which has also been at basically a
standstill despite the efforts of the IGOs.
I know that I personally, with my colleagues at the OECD,
organized a meeting in Paris last summer which we hoped
would spur things along a bit but we didn't really see any
progress happening after that, so that was another bit of
disappointment.
And then also in -- it's interesting to hear everyone say that the
board is waiting for a steer from the GNSO or everyone's waiting
for the board to act because in my informal conversations with
board members I've heard a little bit of the opposite, that they
needed action to happen from elsewhere.
So I think whether it's in the context of the small group or in
some other informal conference call or email conversation or inperson meeting or what have you, the IGOs are here, we're
available, if you want to just sit down and have a conversation
and maybe figure out how we can bring this to a close.
Thank you.

Page 39 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

JAMES BLADEL:

EN

Thank you. Certainly appreciate the offer, and it is something
that I think we may explore as we go forward.
We had one other question, I think, from Switzerland? Is that
right?

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you very much and thank you for your comments.
I wanted to echo what the U.K. and also what the OECD have
said. I think that these are related, although different, issues
with different legal bases which, as you know, we have
repeatedly asked for a solution on a permanent basis which
takes up the -- the provisional protections at the same level, and
I trust that both the board and the GNSO, and also consulting
with us, if needed, you may come up with a solution on this
which takes up the level of protections that is already there on a
provisional basis, and that we really deliver something on this,
and in a short time frame, as soon as possible, and treating both
issues differentiate -- in a differentiated manner according to the
different legal bases. Thank you.

JAMES BLADEL:

Page 40 of 47

Thank you. And the last note on this would be Donna.

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

DONNA AUSTIN:

EN

Thanks, James. Donna Austin.
Just responding to something that the OECD mentioned, one of
the things that became obvious during our conversation with
some of the board members on Monday is that there is
confusion around process, and that's something that we will try
to get clarity on with the board. I think it's something that we've
committed to do.
So we do have a little bit of a miscommunication in terms of
process on this one, so we need to clear that up.
There are certain things that the GNSO Council can do, but we
don't have the flexibility in what we can do that the board seems
to assume that we have, so we need to get some clarity around
that and make sure everybody understands what we can and
can't do moving forward. Thanks.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think Donna raises an important point. There has
been a little bit of like a weird football game where nobody's
trying to score the goal but just kick the ball to the next one in
hope that he would do it, with the board asking the GNSO to
maybe modify its recommendations where they didn't run out of

Page 41 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

line with the GAC's advice and the GNSO waiting for the board to
take that decision.
As long as you take over GAC advice, we actually don't care how
you take that decision so it's actually fairly simple. So that
would be a very pragmatic solution from our side.
And sometimes this is the chance and sometimes it can also be
good to have new flesh blood to maybe have the right knives to
cut the Gordian Knots that are there in terms of process and
other matters. So we all hope -- and you're right, there have
been quite significant delays in this so-called small group where
we had some hope that we would find a pragmatical solution
that could then be shared with the rest and we got very far but
not to the very end.
And again, the excuse for everything, of course, have been the
transition from all sides that everybody was so taken by this.
That excuse is now gone, so we -- as you know, we have
scheduled a meeting here to try and move this on, and I think we
need to keep each other informed about process -- progress or
problems with progress, so that we come to a close on this one
in a reasonable time. Thank you.
So we have a few minutes left and I think it would be good from - Mark, a very short (indiscernible) on this?

Page 42 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

MARK CARVELL:

Sorry, Chair. Sorry. It's another point. I just wanted to get in a
different issue. Do you want to do it in --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay.

MARK CARVELL:

Oh. Thank you very much.
My point relates to a report by the Internet Watch Foundation,
2015. The Internet Watch Foundation, based in the U.K., is
tasked with identifying and blocking child abuse imagery on
line, and their report records that child abuse images were
found on new gTLDs for the first time in 2015.
They took -- the Internet Watch Foundation took action on 436
new gTLD domains, many of which appeared to have been
registered specifically for that purpose.

Child abuse image

dissemination.
So I -- my question is: Is the GNSO aware of this report and is it
taking any action to consider it and react? Thank you.

Page 43 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

JAMES BLADEL:

EN

So just briefly, no, I'm not aware of this particular report. I know
that, you know, speaking personally, our company has been
involved with the Internet Watch Foundation and -- to address
this issues, as well as MICMAC, the U.S. counterpart. I certainly
don't believe that there's any question that that would be
something that the -- not only the industry, but also law
enforcement across the globe would take action upon. I'd be
curious to see this report, and -- but this is the first time hearing
of it. Thanks.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Mark, for raising this. This is, of course, an issue of
fundamental importance so we should all have a look into this.
We're basically done, but I would like to spend two minutes
before the coffee break on asking James a very quick
information about knowing that they -- the GNSO is looking at
their internal procedures and mechanisms, analyzing to what
extent they are fit or not for their participation in the new
empowered community structure, knowing that we have to deal
with this as well -- we're going to talk about this in our session
on IANA transition and the one on operating principles -- it may
be useful and inspiring for us to see how are you proceeding.

Page 44 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

So if you, in one, two minutes, could outline to us how you're
doing and what the key things are that you're realizing should be
done.

JAMES BLADEL:

Sure. So that effort is just getting underway at this meeting. We
have a motion for consideration during our meet- -- during our
meeting tomorrow. I suspect that that will begin in earnest
between now and our meeting in July, where we will form a
team to take a look at these issues. We have an analysis that
was prepared for us by staff that will probably be the starting
point for those discussions to understand exactly what
mechanisms or what aspects of the empowered community we
are ready for, what we're not ready for, and how to best
approach the process to fill in those gaps.
I think that one of the questions we had yesterday that we're still
working out, and it will probably come up again in our
discussions tomorrow, is the time line and how -- what our sense
of urgency is, whether this is something that needs to be -- some
of these need to be in place, perhaps, earlier and closer to the
actual transition, where some perhaps can wait a little bit longer
towards the end of the year. But all of those things will be up for
discussion as we kick off this exercise.

Page 45 of 47

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

EN

But I will confess to the fact that we are just getting started, it's
very early on, and -- but I have -- I'm encouraged by what we've
done thus far.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. And I've seen some of the documents and I don't
know whether they have been shared with the whole GAC but
actually there are some interesting elements in it for us, so in
case they haven't been shared I would like to ask the secretariat
to share this with everybody and continue to feed us, as you
seem to be, not too much but slightly ahead of us. Continue to
feed us with your work on this, because that may be useful for us
as well.
Any final questions, comments, things that you would like to
raise before we let you go to the back to get your coffee?
It does not seem to be the case. In that case, I would like to
thank you for this exchange. Again, it was very useful, I think.
Also building on our exchanges on more substantive details that
we had already in the past days. Let's continue like this. Thank
you very much. This is the coffee break.

JAMES BLADEL:

Page 46 of 47

Thank you.

HELSINKI – GAC Meeting with the GNSO

[ Break ]

Page 47 of 47

EN

